Book Three+



IN CARNUNTUM



1.  Not  just  that  every  day  more  of  our  life  is  used  up  and

less  and less  of  it is left,  but  this  too: if  we live longer, can

we  be  sure  our  mind  will  still  be  up  to  understanding  the

world—to the contemplation that aims at divine and human

knowledge?  If  our  mind  starts  to  wander,  we’ll  still  go  on

breathing, go on eating, imagining things, feeling urges and

so  on.  But  getting  the  most  out  of  ourselves,  calculating

where  our  duty  lies,  analyzing  what  we  hear  and  see,

deciding whether it’s time to call it quits—all the things you

need a healthy mind for . . . all those are gone.



So we need to hurry.



Not  just  because  we  move  daily  closer  to  death  but  also

because  our  understanding—our  grasp  of  the  world—may

be gone before we get there.



2.  We  should  remember  that  even  Nature’s  inadvertence

has its own charm, its own attractiveness. The way loaves of

bread  split  open  on  top  in  the  oven;  the  ridges  are  just  by-

products  of  the  baking,  and  yet  pleasing,  somehow:  they

rouse our appetite without our knowing why.



Or how ripe ﬁgs begin to burst.



And  olives  on  the  point  of  falling:  the  shadow  of  decay



gives them a peculiar beauty.



Stalks  of  wheat  bending  under  their  own  weight.  The

furrowed  brow  of  the  lion.  Flecks  of  foam  on  the  boar’s

mouth.



And  other  things.  If  you  look  at  them  in  isolation  there’s

nothing  beautiful  about  them,  and  yet  by  supplementing

nature  they  enrich  it  and  draw  us  in.  And  anyone  with  a

feeling for nature—a deeper sensitivity—will ﬁnd it all gives

pleasure.  Even  what  seems  inadvertent.  He’ll  ﬁnd  the  jaws

of  live  animals  as  beautiful  as  painted  ones  or  sculptures.

He’ll  look  calmly  at  the  distinct  beauty  of  old  age  in  men,

women,  and  at  the  loveliness  of  children.  And  other  things

like that will call out to him constantly—things unnoticed by

others. Things seen only by those at home with Nature and

its works.



3.  Hippocrates  cured  many  illnesses—and  then  fell  ill  and

died. The Chaldaeans predicted the deaths of many others;

in  due  course  their  own  hour  arrived.  Alexander,  Pompey,

Caesar—who utterly  destroyed  so  many  cities,  cut  down  so

many thousand foot and horse in battle—they too departed

this life. Heraclitus often told us the world would end in ﬁre.

But  it  was  moisture  that  carried  him  oﬀ;  he  died  smeared

with  cowshit.  Democritus  was  killed  by  ordinary  vermin,

Socrates by the human kind.



And?



You boarded, you set sail, you’ve made the passage. Time

to  disembark.  If  it’s  for  another  life,  well,  there’s  nowhere

without gods on that side either. If to nothingness, then you

no  longer  have  to  put  up  with  pain  and  pleasure,  or  go  on



dancing  attendance  on  this  battered  crate,  your  body—so

much inferior to that which serves it.



One is mind and spirit, the other earth and garbage.



4.  Don’t  waste  the  rest  of  your  time  here  worrying  about

other  people—unless  it  aﬀects  the  common  good.  It  will

keep  you  from  doing  anything  useful.  You’ll  be  too

preoccupied  with  what  so-and-so  is  doing,  and  why,  and

what  they’re  saying,  and  what  they’re  thinking,  and  what

they’re up to, and all the other things that throw you oﬀ and

keep you from focusing on your own mind.



You  need  to  avoid  certain  things  in  your  train  of  thought:

everything  random,  everything  irrelevant.  And  certainly

everything self-important or malicious. You need to get used

to winnowing your thoughts, so that if someone says, “What

are  you  thinking  about?”  you  can  respond  at  once  (and

truthfully) that you are thinking this or thinking that. And it

would  be  obvious  at  once  from  your  answer  that  your

thoughts  were  straightforward  and  considerate  ones—the

thoughts  of  an  unselﬁsh  person,  one  unconcerned  with

indulgence  generally,  with

pleasure  and  with  sensual 

squabbling,  with  slander  and  envy,  or  anything  else  you’d

be ashamed to be caught thinking.



Someone  like  that—someone  who  refuses  to  put  oﬀ

joining  the  elect—is  a  kind  of  priest,  a  servant  of  the  gods,

in  touch  with  what  is  within  him  and  what  keeps  a  person

undeﬁled by pleasures, invulnerable to any pain, untouched

by  arrogance,  unaﬀected  by  meanness,  an  athlete  in  the

to  be

greatest  of  all  contests—the  struggle  not 

overwhelmed  by  anything  that  happens.  With  what  leaves

us  dyed  indelibly  by  justice,  welcoming  wholeheartedly

whatever  comes—whatever  we’re  assigned—not  worrying



too  often,  or  with  any  selﬁsh  motive,  about  what  other

people say. Or do, or think.



He  does  only  what  is  his  to  do,  and  considers  constantly

what  the  world  has  in  store  for  him—doing  his  best,  and

trusting that all is for the best. For we carry our fate with us

—and it carries us.



He  keeps  in  mind  that  all  rational  things  are  related,  and

that  to  care  for  all  human  beings  is  part  of  being  human.

Which  doesn’t  mean  we  have  to  share  their  opinions.  We

should  listen  only  to  those  whose  lives  conform  to  nature.

And  the  others?  He  bears  in  mind  what  sort  of  people  they

are—both at home and abroad, by night as well as day—and

who  they  spend  their  time  with.  And  he  cares  nothing  for

their praise—men who can’t even meet their own standards.



5. How to act:



Never under compulsion, out of selﬁshness, without

forethought, with misgivings.



Don’t gussy up your thoughts.



No surplus words or unnecessary actions.



Let the spirit in you represent a man, an adult, a citizen,

a Roman, a ruler. Taking up his post like a soldier and

patiently awaiting his recall from life. Needing no oath

or witness.



Cheerfulness. Without requiring other people’s help. Or

serenity supplied by others.



To stand up straight—not straightened.



6.  If,  at  some  point  in  your  life,  you  should  come  across

anything better than justice, honesty, self-control, courage—

than a mind satisﬁed that it has succeeded in enabling you

to  act  rationally,  and  satisﬁed  to  accept  what’s  beyond  its

control—if  you  ﬁnd  anything  better  than  that,  embrace  it

without  reservations—it  must  be  an  extraordinary  thing

indeed—and enjoy it to the full.



But  if  nothing  presents  itself  that’s  superior  to  the  spirit

that  lives  within—the  one  that  has  subordinated  individual

desires to itself, that discriminates among impressions, that



has broken free of physical temptations (as Socrates used to

say),  and  subordinated  itself  to  the  gods,  and  looks  out  for

human  beings’  welfare—if  you  ﬁnd  that  there’s  nothing

more important or valuable than that . . .



.  .  .  then  don’t  make  room  for  anything  but  it—for

anything that might lead you astray, tempt you oﬀ the road,

and  leave  you  unable  to  devote  yourself  completely  to

achieving  the  goodness  that  is  uniquely  yours.  It  would  be

wrong  for  anything  to  stand  between  you  and  attaining

goodness—as a rational being and a citizen. Anything at all:

the  applause  of  the  crowd,  high  oﬃce,  wealth,  or  self-

indulgence. All of them might seem to be compatible with it

—for  a  while.  But  suddenly  they  control  us  and  sweep  us

away.



So  make  your  choice  straightforwardly,  once  and  for  all,



and stick to it. Choose what’s best.



—Best is what beneﬁts me.



As  a  rational  being?  Then  follow  through.  Or  just  as  an

animal? Then say so and stand your ground without making

a  show  of  it.  (Just  make  sure  you’ve  done  your  homework

ﬁrst.)



7.  Never  regard  something  as  doing  you  good  if  it  makes

you  betray  a  trust,  or  lose  your  sense  of  shame,  or  makes

you show hatred, suspicion, ill will, or hypocrisy, or a desire

for  things  best  done  behind  closed  doors.  If  you  can

privilege  your  own  mind,  your  guiding  spirit  and  your

reverence  for  its  powers,  that  should  keep  you  clear  of

dramatics, of wailing and gnashing of teeth. You won’t need

solitude—or a cast of thousands, either. Above all, you’ll be

free of fear and desire. And how long your body will contain

the  soul  that  inhabits  it  will  cause  you  not  a  moment’s



worry. If it’s time for you to go, leave willingly—as you would

to  accomplish  anything  that  can  be  done  with  grace  and

honor. And concentrate on this, your whole life long: for your

mind to be in the right state—the state a rational, civic mind

should be in.



8. The mind of one set straight and puriﬁed: no pus, no dirt,

no scabs.



And not a life cut short by death, like an actor who stops



before the play is done, the plot wound up.



Neither  servility  nor  arrogance.  Neither  cringing  nor



disdain. Neither excuses nor evasions.



9. Your ability to control your thoughts—treat it with respect.

It’s all that protects your mind from false perceptions—false

to  your  nature,  and  that  of  all  rational  beings.  It’s  what

makes  thoughtfulness  possible,  and  aﬀection  for  other

people, and submission to the divine.



10.  Forget  everything  else.  Keep  hold  of  this  alone  and

remember  it:  Each  of  us  lives  only  now,  this  brief  instant.

The rest has been lived already, or is impossible to see. The

span  we  live  is  small—small  as  the  corner  of  the  earth  in

which we live it. Small as even the greatest renown, passed

from  mouth  to  mouth  by  short-lived  stick  ﬁgures,  ignorant

alike of themselves and those long dead.



11.  To  the  stand-bys  above,  add  this  one:  always  to  deﬁne

whatever  it  is  we  perceive—to  trace  its  outline—so  we  can

see  what  it  really  is:  its  substance.  Stripped  bare.  As  a

whole.  Unmodiﬁed.  And  to  call  it  by  its  name—the  thing

itself and its components, to which it will eventually return.

Nothing  is  so  conducive  to  spiritual  growth  as  this  capacity

for logical and accurate analysis of everything that happens

to  us.  To  look  at  it  in  such  a  way  that  we  understand  what



need  it  fulﬁlls,  and  in  what  kind  of  world.  And  its  value  to

that world as a whole and to man in particular—as a citizen

of  that  higher  city,  of  which  all  other  cities  are  mere

households.



What is it—this thing that now forces itself on my notice?

What  is  it  made  up  of?  How  long  was  it  designed  to  last?

And  what  qualities  do  I  need  to  bring  to  bear  on  it—

trustworthiness,

courage, 

tranquillity, 

straightforwardness, independence or what?



honesty, 



So in each case you need to say: “This is due to God.” Or:

“This  is  due  to  the  interweavings  and  intertwinings  of  fate,

to  coincidence  or  chance.”  Or:  “This  is  due  to  a  human

being. Someone of the same race, the same birth, the same

society, but who doesn’t know what nature requires of him.

But I do. And so I’ll treat them as the law that binds us—the

law of nature—requires. With kindness and with justice.



And  in  inconsequential  things?  I’ll  do  my  best  to  treat



them as they deserve.”



12.  If  you  do  the  job  in  a  principled  way,  with  diligence,

free  of

energy  and  patience, 

distractions, and keep the spirit inside you undamaged, as if

you might have to give it back at any moment—



if  you  keep  yourself 



If  you  can  embrace  this  without  fear  or  expectation—can

ﬁnd  fulﬁllment  in  what  you’re  doing  now,  as  Nature

intended,  and  in  superhuman  truthfulness  (every  word,

every utterance)—then your life will be happy.



No one can prevent that.



13.  Doctors  keep  their  scalpels  and  other  instruments

handy,  for  emergencies.  Keep  your  philosophy  ready  too—

ready  to  understand  heaven  and  earth.  In  everything  you



do,  even  the  smallest  thing,  remember  the  chain  that  links

them. Nothing earthly succeeds by ignoring heaven, nothing

heavenly by ignoring the earth.



14.  Stop  drifting.  You’re  not  going  to  re-read  your  Brief

Comments, your Deeds of the Ancient Greeks and Romans,

the  commonplace  books  you  saved  for  your old age. Sprint

for  the  ﬁnish.  Write  oﬀ  your  hopes,  and  if  your  well-being

matters to you, be your own savior while you can.



15.  They  don’t  realize  how  much  is  included  in  stealing,

sowing, buying, resting, seeing to business  (not  with  the

eyes, but another kind of sight).



16. Body. Soul. Mind.



Sensations: the body.



Desires: the soul.



Reasoning: the mind.



To experience sensations: even grazing beasts do that. To

let your desires control you: even wild animals do that—and

rutting humans, and tyrants (from Phalaris to Nero . . .).



To  make  your  mind  your  guide  to  what  seems  best:  even

people who deny the gods do that. Even people who betray

their  country.  Even  people  who  do  <.  .  .>  behind  closed

doors.



If all the rest is common coin, then what is unique to the



good man?



To  welcome  with  aﬀection  what  is  sent  by  fate.  Not  to

stain  or  disturb  the  spirit  within  him  with  a  mess  of  false

beliefs.  Instead,  to  preserve  it  faithfully,  by  calmly  obeying



God—saying  nothing  untrue,  doing  nothing  unjust.  And  if

the  others  don’t  acknowledge 

lived  with

simplicity,  humility,  cheerfulness—he  doesn’t  resent  them

for  it,  and  isn’t  deterred  from  following  the  road  where  it

leads: to the end of life. An end to be approached in purity,

in serenity, in acceptance, in peaceful unity with what must

be.



it—this 



life 



