Book Four+



1. Our inward power, when it obeys nature, reacts to events

by  accommodating  itself  to  what  it  faces—to  what  is

possible.  It  needs  no  speciﬁc  material.  It  pursues  its  own

aims as circumstances allow; it turns obstacles into fuel. As

a  ﬁre  overwhelms  what  would  have  quenched  a  lamp.

What’s  thrown  on  top  of  the  conﬂagration  is  absorbed,

consumed by it—and makes it burn still higher.



2.  No  random  actions,  none  not  based  on  underlying

principles.



3. People try to get away from it all—to the country, to the

beach,  to  the  mountains.  You  always  wish  that  you  could

too. Which is idiotic: you can get away from it anytime you

like.



By going within.



Nowhere  you  can  go  is  more  peaceful—more  free  of

interruptions—than  your  own  soul.  Especially  if  you  have

other things to rely on. An instant’s recollection and there it

is: complete tranquillity. And by tranquillity I mean a kind of

harmony.



So  keep  getting  away  from  it  all—like  that.  Renew

yourself. But keep it brief and basic. A quick visit should be

enough to ward oﬀ all < . . . > and send you back ready to

face what awaits you.



What’s  there  to  complain  about?  People’s  misbehavior?



But take into consideration:



• that rational beings exist for one another;



• that doing what’s right sometimes requires patience;



• that no one does the wrong thing deliberately;



•  and  the  number  of  people  who  have  feuded  and

envied and hated and fought and died and been buried.



. . . and keep your mouth shut.



Or are you complaining about the things the world assigns

you?  But  consider  the  two  options:  Providence  or  atoms.

And all the arguments for seeing the world as a city.



Or  is  it  your  body?  Keep  in  mind  that  when  the  mind

detaches itself and realizes its own nature, it no longer has

anything to do with ordinary life—the rough and the smooth,

either  one.  And  remember  all  you’ve  been  taught—and

accepted—about pain and pleasure.



Or  is  it  your  reputation  that’s  bothering  you?  But  look  at

how soon we’re all forgotten. The abyss of endless time that

swallows it all. The emptiness of all those applauding hands.

The  people  who  praise  us—how  capricious  they  are,  how

arbitrary. And the tiny region in which it all takes place. The

whole  earth  a  point  in  space—and  most  of  it  uninhabited.

How many people there will be to admire you, and who they

are.



So  keep  this  refuge  in  mind:  the  back  roads  of  your  self.

Above all, no strain and no stress. Be straightforward. Look



at things like a man, like a human being, like a citizen, like a

mortal. And among the things you turn to, these two:



i.  That  things  have  no  hold  on  the  soul.  They  stand

there unmoving, outside it. Disturbance comes only

from within—from our own perceptions.



ii. That everything you see will soon alter and cease

to exist. Think of how many changes you’ve already

seen.



“The  world  is  nothing  but  change.  Our  life  is  only

perception.”



4. If thought is something we share, then so is reason—what

makes us reasoning beings.



If so, then the reason that tells us what to do and what not



to do is also shared.



And if so, we share a common law.



And thus, are fellow citizens.



And fellow citizens of something.



And in that case, our state must be the world. What other

entity  could  all  of  humanity  belong  to?  And  from  it—from

this state that we share—come thought and reason and law.



Where  else  could  they  come  from?  The  earth  that

composes  me  derives  from  earth,  the  water  from  some

other element, the air from its own source, the heat and ﬁre

from theirs—since nothing comes from nothing, or returns to

it.



So thought must derive from somewhere else as well.



5. Death: something like birth, a natural mystery, elements

that split and recombine.



Not  an  embarrassing  thing.  Not  an  oﬀense  to  reason,  or



our nature.



6. That sort of person is bound to do that. You might as well

resent  a  ﬁg  tree  for  secreting  juice.  (Anyway,  before  very

long you’ll both be dead—dead and soon forgotten.)



7. Choose not to be harmed—and you won’t feel harmed.



Don’t feel harmed—and you haven’t been.



8.  It  can  ruin  your  life  only  if  it  ruins  your  character.

Otherwise it cannot harm you—inside or out.



9. It was for the best. So Nature had no choice but to do it.



10. That every event is the right one. Look closely and you’ll

see.



Not just the right one overall, but right. As if someone had



weighed it out with scales.



Keep  looking  closely  like  that,  and  embody  it  in  your



actions: goodness—what deﬁnes a good person.



Keep to it in everything you do.



11. Not what your enemy sees and hopes that you will, but

what’s really there.



12.  Two  kinds  of  readiness  are  constantly  needed:  (i)  to  do

only  what  the  logos  of  authority  and  law  directs,  with  the

good  of  human  beings  in  mind;  (ii)  to  reconsider  your



position, when someone can set you straight or convert you

to  his.  But  your  conversion  should  always  rest  on  a

conviction  that  it’s  right,  or  beneﬁts  others—nothing  else.

Not because it’s more appealing or more popular.



13. You have a mind?



—Yes.



Well, why not use it? Isn’t that all you want—for it to do its



job?



14.  You  have  functioned  as  a  part  of  something;  you  will

vanish into what produced you.



Or be restored, rather.



To the logos from which all things spring.



By being changed.



15. Many lumps of incense on the same altar. One crumbles

now, one later, but it makes no diﬀerence.



16.  Now  they  see  you  as  a  beast,  a  monkey.  But  in  a  week

they’ll think you’re a god—if you rediscover your beliefs and

honor the logos.



17.  Not  to  live  as  if  you  had  endless  years  ahead  of  you.

Death  overshadows  you.  While  you’re  alive  and  able—be

good.



18.  The  tranquillity  that  comes  when  you  stop  caring  what

they  say.  Or  think,  or  do.  Only  what you  do.  (Is  this  fair?  Is

this the right thing to do?)



<  .  .  .  >  not  to  be  distracted  by  their  darkness.  To  run



straight for the ﬁnish line, unswerving.



19. People who are excited by posthumous fame forget that

the people who remember them will soon die too. And those

after  them  in  turn.  Until  their  memory,  passed  from  one  to

another like a candle ﬂame, gutters and goes out.



But  suppose  that  those  who  remembered  you  were

immortal and your memory undying. What good would it do

you?  And  I  don’t  just  mean  when  you’re  dead,  but  in  your

own  lifetime.  What  use  is  praise,  except  to  make  your

lifestyle a little more comfortable?



“ You’re out of step—neglecting the gifts of nature to hand



on someone’s words in the future. “



20. Beautiful things of any kind are beautiful in themselves

and  suﬃcient  to  themselves.  Praise  is  extraneous.  The

object  of  praise  remains  what  it  was—no  better  and  no

worse.  This  applies,  I  think,  even  to  “beautiful”  things  in

ordinary life—physical objects, artworks.



Does  anything  genuinely  beautiful  need  supplementing?

No  more  than  justice  does—or  truth,  or  kindness,  or

humility.  Are  any  of  those  improved  by  being  praised?  Or

damaged by contempt? Is an emerald suddenly ﬂawed if no

one  admires  it?  Or  gold,  or  ivory,  or  purple?  Lyres?  Knives?

Flowers? Bushes?



21. If our souls survive, how does the air ﬁnd room for them

—all of them—since the beginning of time?



How does the earth ﬁnd room for all the bodies buried in it

since the beginning of time? They linger for whatever length

of time, and then, through change and decomposition, make

room  for  others.  So  too  with  the  souls  that  inhabit  the  air.

They  linger  a  little,  and  then  are  changed—diﬀused  and

kindled  into  ﬁre,  absorbed  into  the  logos  from  which  all

things spring, and so make room for new arrivals.



One possible answer.



But we shouldn’t think only of the mass of buried  bodies.

There are the ones consumed, on a daily basis, by us and by

other  animals.  How  many  are  swallowed  up  like  that,

entombed in the bodies of those nourished by them, and yet

there  is  room  for  them  all—converted  into  ﬂesh  and  blood,

transformed to air and ﬁre.



How is the truth of this determined?



Through analysis: material and cause.



22. Not to be driven this way and that, but always to behave

with justice and see things as they are.



23. To the world: Your harmony is mine. Whatever time you

choose is the right time. Not late, not early.



To  nature:  What  the  turn  of  your  seasons  brings  me  falls

like  ripe  fruit.  All  things  are  born  from  you,  exist  in  you,

return to you.



The  poet says  “dear  city  of  Cecrops .  .  .”  Can’t  you  bring



yourself to say “of Zeus”?



24.  “If  you  seek  tranquillity,  do  less.”  Or  (more  accurately)

do  what’s  essential—what  the  logos  of  a  social  being

requires,  and  in  the  requisite  way.  Which  brings  a  double

satisfaction: to do less, better.



Because  most  of  what  we  say  and  do  is  not  essential.  If

you  can  eliminate  it,  you’ll  have  more  time,  and  more

tranquillity.  Ask  yourself  at  every  moment,  “Is  this

necessary?”



But  we  need  to  eliminate  unnecessary  assumptions  as



well. To eliminate the unnecessary actions that follow.



25. And then you might see what the life of the good man is

like—someone  content  with  what  nature  assigns  him,  and

satisﬁed with being just and kind himself.



26. You’ve seen that. Now look at this.



Don’t be disturbed. Uncomplicate yourself.



Someone has done wrong . . . to himself.



Something happens to you. Good. It was meant for you by



nature, woven into the pattern from the beginning.



Life  is  short.  That’s  all  there  is  to  say.  Get  what  you  can



from the present—thoughtfully, justly.



Unrestrained moderation.



27. An ordered world or a mishmash. But still an order. Can

there  be  order  within  you  and  not  in  everything  else?  In

things so diﬀerent, so dispersed, so intertwined?



28.  Character:  dark,  womanish,  obstinate.  Wolf,  sheep,

child, fool, cheat, buﬀoon, salesman, tyrant.



29.  Alien:  (n.)  one  who  doesn’t  know  what  the  world

contains. Or how it operates.



Fugitive: (n.) one who evades his obligations to others.



Blind:  (adj.)  one  who  keeps  the  eyes  of  his  mind  shut



tight.



Poor: (adj.) requiring others; not having the necessities of



life in one’s own possession.



Rebel: (n.) one who is rebellious, one who withdraws from

the  logos  of  Nature  because  he  resents  its  workings.  (It

produced you; now it produces this.)



Schismatic:  (n.)  one  who  separates  his  own  soul  from



others with the logos. They should be one.



30. A philosopher without clothes and one without books. “I

have  nothing  to  eat,”  says  he,  as  he  stands  there  half-

naked,  “but  I  subsist  on  the  logos.”  And  with  nothing  to

read, I subsist on it too.



31.  Love  the  discipline  you  know,  and  let  it  support  you.

Entrust everything willingly to the gods, and then make your

way through life—no one’s master and no one’s slave.



32.  The  age  of  Vespasian,  for  example.  People  doing  the

exact  same  things:  marrying,  raising  children,  getting  sick,

dying,  waging  war,  throwing  parties,  doing  business,

farming,  ﬂattering,  boasting,  distrusting,  plotting,  hoping

others  will  die,  complaining  about  their  own  lives,  falling  in

love, putting away money, seeking high oﬃce and power.



And that life they led is nowhere to be found.



Or the age of Trajan. The exact same things. And that life



too—gone.



Survey  the  records  of  other  eras.  And  see  how  many

others  gave  their  all  and  soon  died  and  decomposed  into

the elements that formed them.



But  most  of  all,  run  through  the  list  of  those  you  knew

yourself.  Those  who  worked  in  vain,  who  failed  to  do  what

they should have—what they should have remained ﬁxed on

and found satisfaction in.



A  key  point  to  bear  in  mind:  The  value  of  attentiveness

varies in proportion to its object. You’re better oﬀ not giving

the small things more time than they deserve.



33. Words once in common use now sound archaic. And the

names  of  the  famous  dead  as  well:  Camillus,  Caeso,

Volesus,  Dentatus  .  .  .  Scipio  and  Cato  .  .  .  Augustus  .  .  .

Hadrian and Antoninus, and . . .



Everything  fades  so  quickly,  turns  into  legend,  and  soon



oblivion covers it.



And  those  are  the  ones  who  shone.  The  rest—“unknown,

unasked-for” a minute after death. What is “eternal” fame?

Emptiness.



Then what should we work for?



Only  this:  proper  understanding;  unselﬁsh  action;  truthful

speech. A resolve to accept whatever happens as necessary

and  familiar,  ﬂowing  like  water  from  that  same  source  and

spring.



34. Hand yourself over to Clotho voluntarily, and let her spin

you into whatever she pleases.



35. Everything transitory—the knower and the known.



36.  Constant  awareness  that  everything  is  born  from

change.  The  knowledge  that  there  is  nothing  nature  loves

more than to alter what exists and make new things like it.

All  that  exists  is  the  seed  of  what  will  emerge  from  it.  You

think  the  only  seeds  are  the  ones  that  make  plants  or

children? Go deeper.



37.  On  the  verge  of  dying  and  still  weighed  down,  still

turbulent, still convinced external things can harm you, still



rude to other people, still not acknowledging the truth: that

wisdom is justice.



38. Look into their minds, at what the wise do and what they

don’t.



39.  Nothing  that  goes  on  in  anyone  else’s  mind  can  harm

you.  Nor  can  the  shifts  and  changes  in  the  world  around

you.



—Then where is harm to be found?



In your capacity to see it. Stop doing that and everything

will  be  ﬁne.  Let  the  part  of  you  that  makes  that  judgment

keep  quiet  even  if  the  body  it’s  attached  to  is  stabbed  or

burnt,  or  stinking  with  pus,  or  consumed  by  cancer.  Or  to

put it another way: It needs to realize that what happens to

everyone—bad  and  good  alike—is  neither  good  nor  bad.

That  what  happens  in  every  life—lived  naturally  or  not—is

neither natural nor unnatural.



40. The world as a living being—one nature, one soul. Keep

that  in  mind.  And  how  everything  feeds  into  that  single

experience,  moves  with  a  single  motion.  And  how

everything  helps  produce everything  else. Spun and woven

together.



41. “A little wisp of soul carrying a corpse.”—Epictetus.



42.  There  is  nothing  bad  in  undergoing  change—or  good  in

emerging from it.



43.  Time  is  a  river,  a  violent  current  of  events,  glimpsed

once and already carried past us, and another follows and is

gone.



in  spring,  the  fruit 



44. Everything that happens is as simple and familiar as the

rose 

in  summer:  disease,  death,

blasphemy,  conspiracy  .  .  .  everything  that  makes  stupid

people happy or angry.



45.  What  follows  coheres  with  what  went  before.  Not  like  a

random  catalogue  whose  order 

it

arbitrarily, but logically connected. And just as what exists is

ordered and harmonious, what comes into being betrays an

order  too.  Not  a  mere  sequence,  but  an  astonishing

concordance.



imposed  upon 



is 



46.  Remember  Heraclitus:  “When  earth  dies,  it  becomes

water; water, air; air, ﬁre; and back to the beginning.”



“Those who have forgotten where the road leads.”



“They are at odds with what is all around them”—the all-

directing  logos.  And  “they  ﬁnd  alien  what  they  meet  with

every day.”



“Our  words  and  actions  should  not  be  like  those  of

sleepers”  (for  we  act  and  speak  in  dreams  as  well)  “or  of

children copying their parents”—doing and saying only what

we have been told.



47.  Suppose  that  a  god  announced  that  you  were  going  to

die tomorrow “or the day after.” Unless you were a complete

coward you wouldn’t kick up a fuss about which day it was—

what  diﬀerence  could  it  make?  Now  recognize  that  the

diﬀerence between years from now and tomorrow is just as

small.



48.  Don’t  let  yourself  forget  how  many  doctors  have  died,

after furrowing their brows over how many deathbeds. How

many  astrologers,  after  pompous  forecasts  about  others’

ends. How many philosophers, after endless disquisitions on



death  and  immortality.  How  many  warriors,  after  inﬂicting

thousands  of  casualties  themselves.  How  many  tyrants,

after  abusing  the  power  of  life  and  death  atrociously,  as  if

they were themselves immortal.



How  many  whole  cities  have  met  their  end:  Helike,



Pompeii, Herculaneum, and countless others.



And all the ones you know yourself, one after another. One

who laid out another for burial, and was buried himself, and

then  the  man  who  buried  him—all  in  the  same  short  space

of time.



In  short,  know  this:  Human  lives  are  brief  and  trivial.



Yesterday a blob of semen; tomorrow embalming ﬂuid, ash.



To pass through this brief life as nature demands. To give



it upwithout complaint.



Like an olive that ripens and falls.



Praising its mother, thanking the tree it grew on.



49. To be like the rock that the waves keep crashing over. It

stands unmoved and the raging of the sea falls still around

it.



49a. —It’s unfortunate that this has happened.



No.  It’s  fortunate  that  this  has  happened  and  I’ve

remained  unharmed  by  it—not  shattered  by  the  present  or

frightened of the future. It could have happened to anyone.

But not everyone could have remained unharmed by it. Why

treat  the  one  as  a  misfortune  rather  than  the  other  as

fortunate?  Can  you  really  call  something  a  misfortune  that

doesn’t  violate  human  nature?  Or  do  you  think  something

that’s not against nature’s will can violate it? But you know



what its will is. Does what’s happened keep you from acting

with 

justice,  generosity,  self-control,  sanity,  prudence,

honesty,  humility,  straightforwardness,  and  all  the  other

qualities that allow a person’s nature to fulﬁll itself?



So  remember  this  principle  when  something  threatens  to

cause you pain: the thing itself was no misfortune at all; to

endure it and prevail is great good fortune.



50.  A  trite  but  eﬀective  tactic  against  the  fear  of  death:

think  of  the  list  of  people  who  had  to  be  pried  away  from

life.  What  did  they  gain  by  dying  old?  In  the  end,  they  all

sleep  six  feet  under—Caedicianus,  Fabius,  Julian,  Lepidus,

and all the rest. They buried their contemporaries, and were

buried in turn.



Our  lifetime  is  so  brief.  And  to  live  it  out  in  these

circumstances,  among  these  people,  in  this  body?  Nothing

to  get  excited  about.  Consider  the  abyss  of  time  past,  the

inﬁnite  future.  Three  days  of  life  or  three  generations:

what’s the diﬀerence?



51. Take the shortest route, the one that nature planned—to

speak and act in the healthiest way. Do that, and be free of

pain and stress, free of all calculation and pretension.



