Book Five+



1.  At  dawn,  when  you  have  trouble  getting  out  of  bed,  tell

yourself: “I have to go to work—as a human being. What do

I have to complain of, if I’m going to do what I was born for

—the  things  I  was  brought  into  the  world  to  do?  Or  is this

what  I  was  created  for?  To  huddle  under  the  blankets  and

stay warm?



—But it’s nicer here. . . .



So  you  were  born  to  feel  “nice”?  Instead  of  doing  things

and experiencing them? Don’t you see the plants, the birds,

the  ants  and  spiders  and  bees  going  about  their  individual

tasks,  putting  the  world  in  order,  as  best  they  can?  And

you’re  not  willing  to  do  your  job  as  a  human  being?  Why

aren’t you running to do what your nature demands?



—But we have to sleep sometime. . . .



Agreed. But nature set a limit on that—as it did on eating

and  drinking.  And  you’re  over  the  limit.  You’ve  had  more

than  enough  of  that.  But  not  of  working.  There  you’re  still

below your quota.



You don’t love yourself enough. Or you’d love your nature

too, and what it demands of you. People who love what they

do wear themselves down doing it, they even forget to wash

or  eat.  Do  you  have  less  respect  for  your  own  nature  than

the  engraver does  for  engraving,  the  dancer  for  the  dance,



the  miser  for  money or the  social climber for  status?  When

they’re really possessed by what they do, they’d rather stop

eating and sleeping than give up practicing their arts.



Is  helping  others  less  valuable  to  you?  Not  worth  your



eﬀort?



2.To shrug it all oﬀ and wipe it clean—every annoyance and

distraction—and reach utter stillness.



Child’s play.



3.  If  an  action  or  utterance  is  appropriate,  then  it’s

appropriate  for  you.  Don’t  be  put  oﬀ  by  other  people’s

comments and criticism. If it’s right to say or do it, then it’s

the right thing for you to do or say.



The others obey their own lead, follow their own impulses.

Don’t  be  distracted.  Keep  walking.  Follow  your  own  nature,

and follow Nature—along the road they share.



4.  I  walk  through  what  is  natural,  until  the  time  comes  to

sink down and rest. To entrust my last breath to the source

of my daily breathing, fall on the source of my father’s seed,

of my mother’s blood, of my nurse’s milk. Of my daily food

and  drink  through  all  these  years.  What  sustains  my

footsteps, and the use I make of it—the many uses.



5. No one could ever accuse you of being quick-witted.



All  right,  but  there  are  plenty  of  other  things  you  can’t

claim you “haven’t got in you.” Practice the virtues you can

show:  honesty,  gravity,  endurance,  austerity,  resignation,

abstinence,  patience,  sincerity,  moderation,  seriousness,

high-mindedness.  Don’t  you  see  how  much  you  have  to

oﬀer—beyond  excuses  like  “can’t”?  And  yet  you  still  settle

for less.



Or  is  it  some  inborn  condition  that  makes  you  whiny  and

grasping  and  obsequious,  makes  you  complain  about  your

body  and  curry  favor  and  show  oﬀ  and  leaves  you  so

turbulent inside?



No. You could have broken free a long way back. And then

you would have been only a little slow. “Not so quick on the

uptake.”



And you need to work on that as well—that slowness. Not



something to be ignored, let alone to prize.



6. Some people, when they do someone a favor, are always

looking  for  a  chance  to  call  it  in.  And  some  aren’t,  but

they’re still  aware of  it—still  regard it as  a debt. But others

don’t even do that. They’re like a vine that produces grapes

without looking for anything in return.



A horse at the end of the race . . .



A dog when the hunt is over . . .



A bee with its honey stored . . .



And a human being after helping others.



They  don’t  make  a  fuss  about  it.  They  just  go  on  to

something  else,  as  the  vine  looks  forward  to  bearing  fruit

again in season.



We should be like that. Acting almost unconsciously.



—Yes. Except conscious of it. Because it’s characteristic of

social  beings  that  they  see  themselves  as  acting  socially.

And expect their neighbors to see it too!



That’s  true.  But  you’re  misunderstanding  me.  You’ll  wind

up  like  the  people  I  mentioned  before,  misled  by  plausible

reasoning. But if you make an eﬀort to understand what I’m

saying, then you won’t need to worry about neglecting your

social duty.



7. Prayer of the Athenians:



Zeus, rain down, rain down



On the land and ﬁelds of Athens.



Either no prayers at all—or one as straightforward as that.



8.  Just  as  you  overhear  people  saying  that  “the  doctor

prescribed such-and-such for him” (like riding, or cold baths,

or walking barefoot . . .), say this: “Nature prescribed illness

for  him.”  Or  blindness.  Or  the  loss  of  a  limb.  Or  whatever.

There “prescribed” means something like “ordered, so as to

further  his  recovery.”  And  so  too  here.  What  happens  to

each of us is ordered. It furthers our destiny.



And  when  we  describe  things  as  “taking  place,”  we’re

talking  like  builders,  who  say  that  blocks  in  a  wall  or  a

pyramid “take their place” in the structure, and ﬁt together

in a harmonious pattern.



For  there  is  a  single  harmony.  Just  as  the  world  forms  a

single  body  comprising  all  bodies,  so  fate  forms  a  single

purpose,  comprising  all  purposes.  Even  complete  illiterates

acknowledge it when they say that something “brought on”

this  or  that.  Brought  on,  yes.  Or  prescribed  it.  And  in  that

case,  let’s  accept  it—as  we  accept  what  the  doctor

prescribes. It may not always be pleasant, but we embrace

it—because  we  want 

the

accomplishment of nature’s plans in that light—the way you



to  get  well.  Look  at 



look at your own health—and accept what happens (even if

it seems hard to accept). Accept it because of what it leads

to:  the  good  health  of  the  world,  and  the  well-being  and

prosperity of Zeus himself, who would not have brought this

on anyone unless it brought beneﬁt to the world as a whole.

No nature would do that—bring something about that wasn’t

beneﬁcial to what it governed.



So  there are two  reasons  to  embrace  what happens.  One

is that it’s happening to you. It was prescribed for you, and

it  pertains  to  you.  The  thread  was  spun  long  ago,  by  the

oldest cause of all.



The other reason is that what happens to an individual is a

cause  of  well-being  in  what  directs  the  world—of  its  well-

being,  its  fulﬁllment,  of  its  very  existence,  even.  Because

the whole is damaged if you cut away anything—anything at

all—from its continuity and its coherence. Not only its parts,

but  its  purposes.  And  that’s  what  you’re  doing  when  you

complain: hacking and destroying.



9.  Not  to  feel  exasperated,  or  defeated,  or  despondent

because  your  days  aren’t  packed  with  wise  and  moral

actions.  But  to  get  back  up  when  you  fail,  to  celebrate

behaving  like  a  human—however  imperfectly—and  fully

embrace the pursuit that you’ve embarked on.



And  not  to  think  of  philosophy  as  your  instructor,  but  as

the  sponge  and  egg  white  that  relieve  ophthalmia—as  a

soothing  ointment,  a  warm  lotion.  Not  showing  oﬀ  your

obedience  to  the  logos,  but  resting  in  it.  Remember:

philosophy requires only what your nature already demands.

What you’ve been after is something else again—something

unnatural.



—But what could be preferable?



That’s  exactly  how  pleasure  traps  us,  isn’t  it?  Wouldn’t

magnanimity  be  preferable?  Or 

freedom?  Honesty?

Prudence?  Piety?  And  is  there  anything  preferable  to

thought  itself—to  logic,  to  understanding?  Think  of  their

surefootedness. Their ﬂuent stillness.



10. Things are wrapped in such a veil of mystery that many

good  philosophers  have  found  it  impossible  to  make  sense

of  them.  Even  the  Stoics  have  trouble.  Any  assessment  we

make is subject to alteration—just as we are ourselves.



Look  closely  at  them—how  impermanent  they  are,  how

meaningless.  Things  that  a  pervert  can  own,  a  whore,  a

thief.



Then look at the way the people around you behave. Even

the  best  of  them  are  hard  to  put  up  with—not  to  mention

putting  up  with  yourself.  In  such  deep  darkness,  such  a

sewer—in the ﬂux of material, of time, of motion and things

moved—I don’t know what there is to value or to work for.



Quite the contrary. We need to comfort ourselves and wait

for  dissolution.  And not  get  impatient in  the  meantime,  but

take refuge in these two things:



i. Nothing can happen to me that isn’t natural.



ii. I can keep from doing anything that God and my

own spirit don’t approve. No one can force me to.



11. What am I doing with my soul?



Interrogate  yourself,  to  ﬁnd  out  what  inhabits  your  so-

called  mind  and  what  kind  of  soul  you  have  now.  A  child’s



soul, an adolescent’s, a woman’s? A tyrant’s soul? The soul

of a predator—or its prey?



12.  Another  way  to  grasp  what  ordinary  people  mean  by

“goods”:



Suppose  you  took  certain  things  as  touchstones  of

goodness:  prudence,  self-control,  justice,  and  courage,  say.

If  you  understood  “goods”  as  meaning  those,  you  wouldn’t

be  able  to  follow  that  line  about  “so  many  goods.  .  .  .”  It

wouldn’t  make  any  sense  to  you.  Whereas 

if  you’d

internalized  the  conventional  meaning,  you’d  be  able  to

follow it perfectly. You’d have no trouble seeing the author’s

meaning and why it was funny.



Which  shows  that  most  people  do  acknowledge  a

distinction. Otherwise we wouldn’t recognize the ﬁrst sense

as jarring and reject it automatically, whereas we accept the

second—the  one  referring  to  wealth  and  the  beneﬁts  of

celebrity and high living—as amusing and apropos.



Now  go  a  step  further.  Ask  yourself  whether  we  should

accept  as  goods—and  should  value—the  things  we  have  to

think  of  to  have  the  line  make  sense—the  ones  whose

abundance leaves their owner with “. . . no place to shit.”



13.  I  am  made  up  of  substance  and  what  animates  it,  and

neither one can ever stop existing, any more than it began

to. Every portion of me will be reassigned as another portion

of  the  world,  and  that  in  turn  transformed  into  another.  Ad

inﬁnitum.



I was produced through one such transformation, and my



parents too, and so on back. Ad inﬁnitum.



N.B.:  Still  holds  good,  even  if  the  world  goes  through



recurrent cycles.



14.  The logos  and  its  employment  are  forces  suﬃcient  for

themselves  and  for  their  works.  They  start  from  their  own

beginning, they proceed to the appointed end. We call such

activities “directed,” from the directness of their course.



15.  Nothing  pertains  to  human  beings  except  what  deﬁnes

us as human. No other things can be demanded of us. They

aren’t proper to human nature, nor is it incomplete without

them. It follows that they are not our goal, or what helps us

reach  it—the  good.  If  any  of  them  were  proper  to  us,  it

would  be  improper  to  disdain  or  resist  it.  Nor  would  we

admire  people  who  show  themselves  immune  to  it.  If  the

things  themselves  were  good,  it  could  hardly  be  good  to

give  them  up.  But  in  reality  the  more  we  deny  ourselves

such things (and things like them)—or are deprived of them

involuntarily, even—the better we become.



16. The things you think about determine the quality of your

mind. Your soul takes on the color of your thoughts. Color it

with a run of thoughts like these:



i.  Anywhere  you  can  lead  your  life,  you  can  lead  a

good one.



—Lives are led at court. . . .



Then good ones can be.



ii. Things gravitate toward what they were intended

for.



What things gravitate toward is their goal.



A thing’s goal is what beneﬁts it—its good.



A  rational  being’s  good  is  unselﬁshness.  What  we

were  born  for.  That’s  nothing  new.  Remember?

Lower things for the sake of higher ones, and higher

ones 

that  have

consciousness are higher than those that don’t. And

those with the logos still higher.



for  one  another.  Things 



17. It is crazy to want what is impossible. And impossible for

the wicked not to do so.



18.  Nothing  happens  to  anyone  that  he  can’t  endure.  The

same  thing  happens  to  other  people,  and  they  weather  it

unharmed—out of sheer obliviousness or because they want

to  display  “character.”  Is  wisdom  really  so  much  weaker

than ignorance and vanity?



19. Things have no hold on the soul. They have no access to

it, cannot move or direct it. It is moved and directed by itself

alone. It takes the things before it and interprets them as it

sees ﬁt.



20. In a sense, people are our proper occupation. Our job is

to do them good and put up with them.



But  when  they  obstruct  our  proper  tasks,  they  become

irrelevant to us—like sun, wind, animals. Our actions may be

impeded  by  them,  but  there  can  be  no  impeding  our

intentions  or  our  dispositions.  Because  we 

can

accommodate and adapt. The mind adapts and converts to

its own purposes the obstacle to our acting.



The impediment to action advances action.



What stands in the way becomes the way.



21. Honor that which is greatest in the world—that on whose

business  all  things  are  employed  and  by  whom  they  are



governed.



And  honor  what  is  greatest  in  yourself:  the  part  that

shares its nature with that power. All things—in you as well

—are employed about its business, and your life is governed

by it.



22. If it does not harm the community, it does not harm its

members.



When you think you’ve been injured, apply this rule: If the

community isn’t injured by it, neither am I. And if it is, anger

is not the answer. Show the oﬀender where he went wrong.



23.  Keep  in  mind  how  fast  things  pass  by  and  are  gone—

those that are now, and those to come. Existence ﬂows past

us like a river: the “what” is in constant ﬂux, the “why” has

a  thousand  variations.  Nothing  is  stable,  not  even  what’s

right here. The inﬁnity of past and future gapes before us—a

chasm whose depths we cannot see.



So  it  would  take  an  idiot  to  feel  self-importance  or

distress.  Or  any  indignation,  either.  As  if  the  things  that

irritate us lasted.



24. Remember:



Matter. How tiny your share of it.



Time. How brief and ﬂeeting your allotment of it.



Fate. How small a role you play in it.



25.  So  other  people  hurt  me?  That’s  their  problem.  Their

character  and  actions  are  not  mine.  What  is  done  to  me  is

ordained by nature, what I do by my own.



26.  The  mind  is  the  ruler  of  the  soul.  It  should  remain

unstirred by agitations of the ﬂesh—gentle and violent ones

alike.  Not  mingling  with  them,  but  fencing  itself  oﬀ  and

keeping those feelings in their place. When they make their

way  into  your  thoughts,  through  the  sympathetic  link

between  mind  and  body,  don’t  try  to  resist  the  sensation.

The sensation is natural. But don’t let the mind start in with

judgments, calling it “good” or “bad.”



27. “To live with the gods.” And to do that is to show them

that  your  soul  accepts  what  it  is  given  and  does  what  the

spirit  requires—the  spirit  God  gave  each  of  us  to  lead  and

guide  us,  a  fragment  of  himself.  Which  is  our  mind,  our

logos.



28.  Don’t  be  irritated  at  people’s  smell  or  bad  breath.

What’s  the  point?  With  that  mouth,  with  those  armpits,

they’re going to produce that odor.



—But  they  have  a  brain!  Can’t  they  ﬁgure  it  out?  Can’t



they recognize the problem?



So you have a brain as well. Good for you. Then use your

logic  to  awaken  his.  Show  him.  Make  him  realize  it.  If  he’ll

listen, then you’ll have solved the problem. Without anger.



28a. Neither player-king nor prostitute.



29. You can live here as you expect to live there.



And  if  they  won’t  let  you,  you  can  depart  life  now  and

forfeit  nothing.  If  the  smoke  makes  me  cough,  I  can  leave.

What’s so hard about that?



Until things reach that point, I’m free. No one can keep me

from  doing  what  I  want.  And  I  want  what  is  proper  to

rational beings, living together.



30. The world’s intelligence is not selﬁsh.



It  created  lower  things  for  the  sake  of  higher  ones,  and

attuned  the  higher  ones  to  one  another.  Look  how  it

subordinates,  how  it  connects,  how  it  assigns  each  thing

what  each  deserves,  and  brings  the  better  things  into

alignment.



31. How have you behaved to the gods, to your parents, to

your  siblings,  to  your  wife,  to  your  children,  to  your

teachers,  to  your  nurses,  to  your  friends,  to  your  relatives,

to  your slaves? Have  they all  had  from  you  nothing  “wrong

and unworthy, either word or deed”?



Consider  all  that  you’ve  gone  through,  all  that  you’ve

survived.  And  that  the  story  of  your  life  is  done,  your

assignment  complete.  How  many  good  things  have  you

seen? How much pain and pleasure have you resisted? How



many  honors  have  you  declined?  How  many  unkind  people

have you been kind to?



32.  Why  do  other  souls—unskilled,  untrained—disturb  the

soul with skill and understanding?



—And which is that?



The one that knows the beginning and the end, and knows

the logos that runs through all things and that assigns to all

a  place,  each  in  its  allotted  span,  throughout  the  whole  of

time.



33. Soon you’ll be ashes, or bones. A mere name, at most—

and even that is just a sound, an echo. The things we want

in  life  are  empty,  stale,  and  trivial.  Dogs  snarling  at  each

other.  Quarreling  children—laughing  and  then  bursting  into

tears  a  moment  later.  Trust,  shame,  justice,  truth—“gone

from the earth and only found in heaven.”



Why  are  you  still  here?  Sensory  objects  are  shifting  and

unstable; our senses dim and easily deceived; the soul itself

a  decoction  of  the  blood;  fame  in  a  world  like  this  is

worthless.



—And so?



Wait for it patiently—annihilation or metamorphosis.



—And until that time comes—what?



Honor  and  revere  the  gods,  treat  human  beings  as  they

deserve,  be  tolerant  with  others  and  strict  with  yourself.

Remember, nothing belongs to you but your ﬂesh and blood

—and nothing else is under your control.



34.  You  can  lead  an  untroubled  life  provided  you  can  grow,

can think and act systematically.



Two  characteristics  shared  by  gods  and  men  (and  every



rational creature):



i. Not to let others hold you back.



ii. To locate goodness in thinking and doing the right

thing, and to limit your desires to that.



35. If:



• this evil is not of my doing,



• nor the result of it,



•  and  the  community  is  not  endangered,  why  should  it

bother me?



Where's the danger for the community?



36. Not to be overwhelmed by what you imagine, but just do

what  you  can  and  should.  And  if  <  .  .  .  >  suﬀer  in

inessentials, not to treat that as a defeat. (Bad habit.)



Like  the  old  man  asking  for  the  orphan’s  toy  on  the  way



out—even though he knew that’s all it was. Like that.



36a. † Up on the platform. †



Have you forgotten what’s what?



—I know, but it was important to them.



And so you have to be an idiot as well?



37.  I  was  once  a  fortunate  man  but  at  some  point  fortune

abandoned me.



But true good fortune is what you make for yourself. Good



fortune: good character, good intentions, and good actions.



