Book Six+



1. Nature is pliable, obedient. And the logos that governs it

has  no  reason  to  do  evil.  It  knows  no  evil,  does  none,  and

causes  harm  to  nothing.  It  dictates  all  beginnings  and  all

endings.



2. Just that you do the right thing. The rest doesn’t matter.



Cold or warm.



Tired or well-rested.



Despised or honored.



Dying . . . or busy with other assignments.



Because  dying,  too,  is  one  of  our  assignments  in  life.



There as well: “to do what needs doing.”



3.  Look  inward.  Don’t  let  the  true  nature  or  value  of

anything elude you.



4. Before long, all existing things will be transformed, to rise

like  smoke  (assuming  all  things  become  one),  or  be

dispersed in fragments.



5. The logos  knows  where  it  stands,  and  what  it  has  to  do,

and what it has to work with.



6. The best revenge is not to be like that.



7. To move from one unselﬁsh action to another with God in

mind.



Only there, delight and stillness.



8. The mind is that which is roused and directed by itself. It

makes of itself what it chooses. It makes what it chooses of

its own experience.



9.  Everything  is  brought  about  by  nature,  not  by  anything

beyond it, or within it, or apart from it.



10.  (i)  Mixture,  interaction,  dispersal;  or  (ii)  unity,  order,

design.



Suppose  (i):  Why  would  I  want  to  live  in  disorder  and

confusion?  Why  would  I  care  about  anything  except  the

eventual “dust to dust”? And why would I feel any anxiety?

Dispersal is certain, whatever I do.



Or  suppose  (ii):  Reverence.  Serenity.  Faith  in  the  power



responsible.



11.  When  jarred,  unavoidably,  by  circumstances,  revert  at

once  to  yourself,  and  don’t  lose  the  rhythm  more  than  you

can  help.  You’ll  have  a  better  grasp  of  the  harmony  if  you

keep on going back to it.



12.  If  you  had  a  stepmother  and  a  real  mother,  you  would

pay your respects to your stepmother, yes . . . but it’s your

real mother you’d go home to.



The court . . . and philosophy: Keep returning to it, to rest

in  its  embrace.  It’s  all  that  makes  the  court—and  you—

endurable.



13.  Like  seeing  roasted  meat  and  other  dishes  in  front  of

you and suddenly realizing: This is a dead ﬁsh. A dead bird.

A dead pig. Or that this noble vintage is grape juice, and the

purple  robes  are  sheep  wool  dyed  with  shellﬁsh  blood.  Or

making love—something rubbing against your penis, a brief

seizure and a little cloudy liquid.



Perceptions  like  that—latching  onto  things  and  piercing

through  them,  so  we  see  what  they  really  are.  That’s  what

we  need  to  do  all  the  time—all  through  our  lives  when

things lay claim to our trust—to lay them bare and see how

pointless  they  are,  to  strip  away  the  legend  that  encrusts

them.



Pride  is  a  master  of  deception:  when  you  think  you’re

occupied in the weightiest business, that’s when he has you

in his spell.



(Compare Crates on Xenocrates.)



14.  Things  ordinary  people  are  impressed  by  fall  into  the

categories of things that are held together by simple physics

(like  stones  or  wood),  or  by  natural  growth  (ﬁgs,  vines,

olives  .  .  .).  Those  admired  by  more  advanced  minds  are

held  together  by  a  living  soul  (ﬂocks  of  sheep,  herds  of

cows). Still more sophisticated people admire what is guided

by a rational mind—not the universal mind, but one admired

for  its  technical  knowledge,  or  for  some  other  skill—or  just

because it happens to own a lot of slaves.



But  those  who  revere  that  other  mind—the  one  we  all

share, as humans and as citizens—aren’t interested in other

things.  Their  focus  is  on  the  state  of  their  own  minds—to

avoid  all  selﬁshness  and  illogic,  and  to  work  with  others  to

achieve that goal.



15. Some things are rushing into existence, others out of it.

Some  of  what  now  exists  is  already  gone.  Change  and  ﬂux

incessant

constantly  remake  the  world, 

progression of time remakes eternity.



just  as  the 



We ﬁnd ourselves in a river. Which of the things around us

should  we  value  when  none  of  them  can  oﬀer  a  ﬁrm

foothold?



Like  an  attachment  to  a  sparrow:  we  glimpse  it  and  it’s



gone.



And life itself: like the decoction of blood, the drawing in of

air. We expel the power of breathing we drew in at birth (just

yesterday or the day before), breathing it out like the air we

exhale at each moment.



16. What is it in ourselves that we should prize?



Not just transpiration (even plants do that).



Or respiration (even beasts and wild animals breathe).



Or being struck by passing thoughts.



Or jerked like a puppet by your own impulses.



Or moving in herds.



Or eating, and relieving yourself afterwards.



Then what is to be prized?



An  audience  clapping?  No.  No  more  than  the  clacking  of

their tongues. Which is all that public praise amounts to—a

clacking of tongues.



So we throw out other people’s recognition. What’s left for



us to prize?



I think it’s this: to do (and not do) what we were designed

for.  That’s  the  goal  of  all  trades,  all  arts,  and  what  each  of

them  aims  at:  that  the  thing  they  create  should  do  what  it

was  designed  to  do.  The  nurseryman  who  cares  for  the

vines, the horse trainer, the dog breeder—this is what they

aim  at.  And  teaching  and  education—what  else  are  they

trying to accomplish?



So  that’s  what  we  should  prize.  Hold  on  to  that,  and  you



won’t be tempted to aim at anything else.



And  if  you  can’t  stop  prizing  a  lot  of  other  things?  Then

you’ll  never  be  free—free,  independent,  imperturbable.

Because  you’ll  always  be  envious  and  jealous,  afraid  that

people  might  come  and  take  it  all  away  from  you.  Plotting

against  those  who  have  them—those  things  you  prize.

People who need those things are bound to be a mess—and

bound to take out their frustrations on the gods. Whereas to

respect  your  own  mind—to  prize  it—will  leave  you  satisﬁed

with your own self, well integrated into your community and

in  tune  with  the  gods  as  well—embracing  what  they  allot

you, and what they ordain.



17. The elements move upward, downward, in all directions.

The  motion  of  virtue  is  diﬀerent—deeper.  It  moves  at  a

steady pace on a road hard to discern, and always forward.



18.  The  way  people  behave.  They  refuse  to  admire  their

contemporaries, the people whose lives they share. No, but

to  be  admired  by  Posterity—people  they’ve  never  met  and

never  will—that’s  what  they  set  their  hearts  on.  You  might

as  well  be  upset  at  not  being  a  hero  to  your  great-

grandfather.



19.  Not  to  assume  it’s  impossible  because  you  ﬁnd  it  hard.

But to recognize that if it’s humanly possible, you can do it

too.



20. In the ring, our opponents can gouge us with their nails

or butt us with their heads and leave a bruise, but we don’t

denounce them for it or get upset with them or regard them

from then on as violent types. We just keep an eye on them

after  that.  Not  out  of  hatred  or  suspicion.  Just  keeping  a

friendly distance.



We  need  to  do  that  in  other  areas.  We  need  to  excuse

what our sparring partners do, and just keep our distance—

without suspicion or hatred.



21. If anyone can refute me—show me I’m making a mistake

or  looking  at  things  from  the  wrong  perspective—I’ll  gladly

change. It’s the truth I’m after, and the truth never harmed

anyone.  What  harms  us  is  to  persist  in  self-deceit  and

ignorance.



22. I do what is mine to do; the rest doesn’t disturb me. The

rest is inanimate,  or has no logos,  or it wanders  at random

and has lost the road.



23.  When  you  deal  with  irrational  animals,  with  things  and

circumstances,  be  generous  and  straightforward.  You  are

rational;  they  are  not.  When  you  deal  with  fellow  human

beings, behave as one. They share in the logos. And invoke

the gods regardless.



Don’t worry about how long you’ll go on doing this.



A single afternoon would be enough.



24.  Alexander  the  Great  and  his  mule  driver  both  died  and

the same thing happened to both. They were absorbed alike



into the life force of the world, or dissolved alike into atoms.



25. Think how much is going on inside you every second—in

your  soul,  in  your  body.  Why  should  it  astonish  you  that  so

much  more—everything  that  happens  in  that  all-embracing

unity, the world—is happening at the same time?



26.  If  someone  asked  you  how  to  write  your  name,  would

you clench your teeth and spit out the letters one by one? If

he  lost  his  temper,  would  you  lose  yours  as  well?  Or  would

you just spell out the individual letters?



Remember—your responsibilities can be broken down into

individual parts as well. Concentrate on those, and ﬁnish the

job  methodically—without  getting  stirred  up  or  meeting

anger with anger.



27.  How  cruel—to  forbid  people  to  want  what  they  think  is

good for them. And yet that’s just what you won’t let them

do when you get angry at their misbehavior. They’re drawn

toward what they think is good for them.



—But it’s not good for them.



Then  show  them  that.  Prove  it  to  them.  Instead  of  losing



your temper.



28. Death. The end of sense-perception, of being controlled

by  our  emotions,  of  mental  activity,  of  enslavement  to  our

bodies.



29. Disgraceful: for the soul to give up when the body is still

going strong.



It

30.  To  escape 

happens.  Make  sure  you  remain  straightforward,  upright,

reverent, serious, unadorned,  an  ally of  justice, pious, kind,



imperialization—that 



indelible  stain. 



aﬀectionate, and doing your duty with a will. Fight to be the

person philosophy tried to make you.



Revere the gods; watch over human beings. Our lives are

short.  The  only  rewards  of  our  existence  here  are  an

unstained character and unselﬁsh acts.



Take Antoninus as your model, always. His energy in doing

what was rational . . . his steadiness in any situation . . . his

sense  of  reverence  .  .  .  his  calm  expression  .  .  .  his

gentleness  .  .  .  his  modesty  .  .  .  his  eagerness  to  grasp

things.  And  how  he  never  let  things  go  before  he  was  sure

he  had  examined  them  thoroughly,  understood  them

perfectly . . . the way he put up with unfair criticism, without

returning  it  .  .  .  how  he  couldn’t  be  hurried  .  .  .  how  he

wouldn’t  listen  to  informers  .  .  .  how  reliable  he  was  as  a

judge  of  character,  and  of  actions  .  .  .  not  prone  to

backbiting, or cowardice, or jealousy, or empty rhetoric . . .

content with the basics—in living quarters, bedding, clothes,

food, servants . . . how hard he worked, how much he put up

with  .  .  .  his  ability  to  work  straight  through  till  dusk—

because  of  his  simple  diet  (he  didn’t  even  need  to  relieve

himself, except at set times) . . . his constancy and reliability

as  a  friend  .  .  .  his  tolerance  of  people  who  openly

questioned  his  views  and  his  delight  at  seeing  his  ideas

improved on . . . his piety—without a trace of superstition . .

.



So that when your time comes, your conscience will be as



clear as his.



31.  Awaken;  return  to  yourself.  Now,  no  longer  asleep,

knowing  they  were  only  dreams,  clear-headed  again,  treat

everything around you as a dream.



32. I am composed of a body and a soul.



Things that happen to the body are meaningless. It cannot



discriminate among them.



Nothing  has  meaning  to  my  mind  except  its  own  actions.

Which  are  within  its  own  control.  And  it’s  only  the

immediate ones that matter. Its past and future actions too

are meaningless.



33. It’s normal to feel pain in your hands and feet, if you’re

using your feet as feet and your hands as hands. And for a

human being to feel stress is normal—if he’s living a normal

human life.



And if it’s normal, how can it be bad?



34.  Thieves,  perverts,  parricides,  dictators:  the  kind  of

pleasures they enjoy.



35.  Have  you  noticed  how  professionals  will  meet  the  man

on the street halfway but without compromising the logos of

their trade? Should we as humans feel less responsibility to

our logos than builders or pharmacists do? A logos we share

with the divine?



36. Asia and Europe: distant recesses of the universe.



The ocean: a drop of water.



Mount Athos: a molehill.



The present: a split second in eternity.



Minuscule, transitory, insigniﬁcant.



36a. Everything derives from it—that universal mind—either

as  eﬀect  or  consequence.  The  lion’s  jaws,  the  poisonous

substances, and every harmful thing—from thorns to mud . .



. are by-products of the good and beautiful. So don’t look at

them  as  alien  to  what  you  revere,  but  focus  on  the  source

that all things spring from.



37. If you’ve seen the present then you’ve seen everything

—as it’s been since the beginning, as it will be forever. The

same substance, the same form. All of it.



38.  Keep  reminding  yourself  of  the  way  things  are

connected,  of  their  relatedness.  All  things  are  implicated  in

one another and in sympathy with each other. This event is

the  consequence  of  some  other  one.  Things  push  and  pull

on each other, and breathe together, and are one.



39. The things ordained for you—teach yourself to be at one

with those. And the people who share them with you—treat

them with love.



With real love.



40. Implements, tools, equipment. If they do what they were

designed  for,  then  they  work.  Even  if  the  person  who

designed them is miles away.



But  with  naturally  occurring  things,  the  force  that

designed  them  is  present  within  them  and  remains  there.

Which  is  why  we  owe  it  special  reverence,  with  the

recognition  that  if  you  live  and  act  as  it  dictates,  then

everything in you is intelligently ordered. Just as everything

in the world is.



41.  You  take  things  you  don’t  control  and  deﬁne  them  as

“good”  or  “bad.”  And  so  of  course  when  the  “bad”  things

happen, or the “good” ones don’t, you blame the gods and

feel hatred for the people responsible—or those you decide

to  make  responsible.  Much  of  our  bad  behavior  stems  from

trying to apply those criteria. If we limited “good” and “bad”



to our own actions, we’d have no call to challenge God, or to

treat other people as enemies.



42.  All  of  us  are  working  on  the  same  project.  Some

consciously, with understanding; some without knowing it. (I

think this is what Heraclitus meant when he said that “those

who sleep are also hard at work”—that they too collaborate

in what happens.) Some of us work in one way, and some in

others.  And  those  who  complain  and  try  to  obstruct  and

thwart  things—they  help  as  much  as  anyone.  The  world

needs them as well.



So  make  up  your  mind  who  you’ll  choose  to  work  with.

The  force  that  directs  all  things  will  make  good  use  of  you

regardless—will  put  you  on  its  payroll  and  set  you  to  work.

But make sure it’s not the job Chrysippus speaks of: the bad

line in the play, put there for laughs.



43.  Does  the  sun  try  to  do  the  rain’s  work?  Or  Asclepius

Demeter’s? And what about each of the stars—diﬀerent, yet

working in common?



44.  If  the  gods  have  made  decisions  about  me  and  the

things  that  happen  to  me,  then  they  were  good  decisions.

(It’s  hard  to  picture  a  god  who  makes  bad  ones.)  And  why

would  they  expend  their  energies  on  causing  me  harm?

What  good  would  it  do  them—or  the  world,  which  is  their

primary concern?



And  if  they  haven’t  made  decisions  about  me  as  an

individual,  they  certainly  have  about  the  general  welfare.

And  anything  that  follows  from  that  is  something  I  have  to

welcome and embrace.



And  if  they  make  no  decisions,  about  anything—and  it’s

blasphemous even to think so (because if so, then let’s stop

sacriﬁcing, praying, swearing oaths, and doing all the other



things  we  do,  believing  the  whole  time  that  the  gods  are

right here with us)—if they decide nothing about our lives . .

. well, I can still make decisions. Can still consider what it’s

to my beneﬁt to do. And what beneﬁts anyone is to do what

his  own  nature  requires.  And  mine  is  rational.  Rational  and

civic.



My  city  and  state  are  Rome—as  Antoninus.  But  as  a

human being? The world. So for me, “good” can only mean

what’s good for both communities.



45.  Whatever  happens  to  you  is  for  the  good  of  the  world.

That  would  be  enough  right  there.  But  if  you  look  closely

you’ll  generally  notice  something  else  as  well:  whatever

happens to a single person is for the good of others. (Good

in the ordinary sense—as the world deﬁnes it.)



46. Just as the arena and the other spectacles weary you—

you’ve  seen  them  all  before—and  the  repetition  grates  on

your  nerves,  so  too  with  life.  The  same  things,  the  same

causes, on all sides.



How much longer?



47.  Keep  this  constantly  in  mind:  that  all  sorts  of  people

have  died—all  professions,  all  nationalities.  Follow  the

thought  all  the  way  down  to  Philistion,  Phoebus,  and

Origanion. Now extend it to other species.



We  have  to  go  there  too,  where  all  of  them  have  already



gone:



.  .  .  the  eloquent  and  the  wise—Heraclitus,  Pythagoras,



Socrates . . .



. . . the heroes of old, the soldiers and kings who followed



them . . .



. . . Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes . . .



.  .  .  the  smart,  the  generous,  the  hardworking,  the



cunning, the selﬁsh . . .



.  .  .  and  even  Menippus  and  his  cohorts,  who  laughed  at



thewhole brief, fragile business.



All underground for a long time now.



And what harm does it do them? Or the others either—the



ones whose names we don’t even know?



The  only  thing  that  isn’t  worthless:  to  live  this  life  out



truthfully and rightly. And be patient with those who don’t.



48.  When  you  need  encouragement,  think  of  the  qualities

the  people  around  you  have:  this  one’s  energy,  that  one’s

modesty,  another’s  generosity,  and  so  on.  Nothing  is  as

encouraging  as  when  virtues  are  visibly  embodied  in  the

people  around  us,  when  we’re  practically  showered  with

them.



It’s good to keep this in mind.



49. It doesn’t bother you that you weigh only x or y pounds

and  not  three  hundred.  Why  should  it  bother  you  that  you

have only x or y years to live and not more? You accept the

limits  placed  on  your  body.  Accept  those  placed  on  your

time.



50. Do your best to convince them. But act on your own, if

justice  requires  it.  If  met  with  force,  then  fall  back  on



acceptance  and  peaceability.  Use  the  setback  to  practice

other virtues.



Remember  that  our  eﬀorts  are  subject  to  circumstances;



you weren’t aiming to do the impossible.



—Aiming to do what, then?



To  try.  And  you  succeeded.  What  you  set  out  to  do  is



accomplished.



51.  Ambition  means  tying  your  well-being  to  what  other

people say or do.



Self-indulgence  means  tying  it  to  the  things  that  happen



to you.



Sanity means tying it to your own actions.



52.  You  don’t  have  to  turn  this  into  something.  It  doesn’t

have  to  upset  you.  Things  can’t  shape  our  decisions  by

themselves.



53. Practice really hearing what people say. Do your best to

get inside their minds.



54. What injures the hive injures the bee.



55.  If  the  crew  talked  back  to  the  captain,  or  patients  to

their doctor, then  whose  authority  would they accept? How

could the passengers be kept safe or the patient healthy?



56.  All  those  people  who  came  into  the  world  with  me  and

have already left it.



57. Honey tastes bitter to a man with jaundice. People with

rabies are terriﬁed of water. And a child’s idea of beauty is a



ball.  Why  does  that  upset  you?  Do  you  think  falsehood  is

less powerful than bile or a rabid dog?



58. No one can keep you from living as your nature requires.

Nothing can happen to you that is not required by Nature.



59. The people they want to ingratiate themselves with, and

the  results,  and  the  things  they  do  in  the  process.  How

quickly  it  will  all  be  erased  by  time.  How  much  has  been

erased already.



