Book Seven+



1. Evil: the same old thing.



No matter what happens, keep this in mind: It’s the same

old thing, from one end of the world to the other. It ﬁlls the

history  books,  ancient  and  modern,  and  the  cities,  and  the

houses too. Nothing new at all.



Familiar, transient.



2. You cannot quench understanding unless you put out the

insights that compose it. But you can rekindle those at will,

like  glowing  coals.  I  can  control  my  thoughts  as  necessary;

then how can I be troubled? What is outside my mind means

nothing to it. Absorb that lesson and your feet stand ﬁrm.



You  can  return  to  life.  Look  at  things  as  you  did  before.



And life returns.



3.  Pointless  bustling  of  processions,  opera  arias,  herds  of

sheep  and  cattle,  military  exercises.  A  bone  ﬂung  to  pet

poodles,  a  little  food  in  the  ﬁsh  tank.  The  miserable

servitude  of  ants,  scampering  of  frightened  mice,  puppets

jerked on strings.



Surrounded  as  we  are  by  all  of  this,  we  need  to  practice

acceptance. Without disdain. But remembering that our own

worth is measured by what we devote our energy to.



4.  Focus  on  what  is  said  when  you  speak  and  on  what

results  from  each  action.  Know  what  the  one  aims  at,  and

what the other means.



5. Is my intellect up to this? If so, then I’ll put it to work, like

a tool provided by nature. And if it isn’t, then I’ll turn the job

over  to  someone  who  can  do  better—unless  I  have  no

choice.



Or I do the best I can with it, and collaborate with whoever

can make use of it, to do what the community needs done.

Because  whatever  I  do—alone  or  with  others—can  aim  at

one thing only: what squares with those requirements.



6.  So  many  who  were  remembered  already  forgotten,  and

those who remembered them long gone.



7. Don’t be ashamed to need help. Like a soldier storming a

wall, you have a mission to accomplish. And if you’ve been

wounded and you need a comrade to pull you up? So what?



8.  Forget  the  future.  When  and  if  it  comes,  you’ll  have  the

same resources to draw on—the same logos.



9. Everything is interwoven, and the web is holy; none of its

parts  are  unconnected.  They  are  composed  harmoniously,

and together they compose the world.



One world, made up of all things.



One divinity, present in them all.



One  substance  and  one  law—the  logos  that  all  rational



beings share.



And one truth . . .



If  this  is  indeed  the  culmination  of  one  process,  beings



who share the same birth, the same logos.



10.  All  substance  is  soon  absorbed  into  nature,  all  that

animates  it  soon  restored  to  the  logos, all  trace  of  them

both soon covered over by time.



11.  To  a  being  with  logos,  an  unnatural  action  is  one  that

conﬂicts with the logos.



12. Straight, not straightened.



13.  What  is  rational  in  diﬀerent  beings  is  related,  like  the

individual limbs of a single being, and meant to function as

a unit.



This  will  be  clearer  to  you  if  you  remind  yourself:  I  am  a



single limb (melos) of a larger body—a rational one.



Or  you  could  say  “a  part”  (meros)—only  a  letter’s

diﬀerence.  But  then  you’re  not  really  embracing  other

people.  Helping  them  isn’t  yet  its  own  reward.  You’re  still

seeing it only as The Right Thing To Do. You don’t yet realize

who you’re really helping.



14. Let it happen, if it wants, to whatever it can happen to.

And  what’s  aﬀected  can  complain  about  it  if  it  wants.  It

doesn’t  hurt  me unless  I interpret its  happening  as harmful

to me. I can choose not to.



15.  No  matter  what  anyone  says  or  does,  my  task  is  to  be

good. Like gold or emerald or purple repeating to itself, “No

matter what anyone says or does, my task is to be emerald,

my color undiminished.”



16. The mind doesn’t get in its own way. It doesn’t frighten

itself  into  desires.  If  other  things  can  scare  or  hurt  it,  let



them;  it  won’t  go  down  that  road  on  the  basis  of  its  own

perceptions.



Let the  body  avoid discomfort  (if  it can),  and  if it feels it,

say  so.  But  the  soul  is  what  feels  fear  and  pain,  and  what

conceives  of  them  in  the  ﬁrst  place,  and  it  suﬀers  nothing.

Because it will never conclude that it has.



The mind in itself has no needs, except for those it creates

itself. Is undisturbed, except for its own disturbances. Knows

no obstructions, except those from within.



17. Well-being is good luck, or good character.



17a. (But what are you doing here, Perceptions? Get back to

where you came from, and good riddance. I don’t need you.

Yes, I know, it was only force of habit that brought you. No,

I’m not angry with you. Just go away.)



18.  Frightened  of  change?  But  what  can  exist  without  it?

What’s  closer  to  nature’s  heart?  Can  you  take  a  hot  bath

and  leave  the  ﬁrewood  as  it  was?  Eat  food  without

transforming  it?  Can  any  vital  process  take  place  without

something being changed?



Can’t  you  see?  It’s  just  the  same  with  you—and  just  as



vital to nature.



19. Carried through existence as through rushing rapids. All

bodies. Which are sprung from nature and cooperate with it,

as  our  limbs  do  with  each  other.  Time  has  swallowed  a

Chrysippus, a Socrates and an Epictetus, many times over.



For “Epictetus” read any person, and any thing.



20.  My  only  fear  is  doing  something  contrary  to  human

nature—the  wrong  thing,  the  wrong  way,  or  at  the  wrong



time.



21. Close to forgetting it all, close to being forgotten.



22.  To  feel  aﬀection  for  people  even  when  they  make

mistakes  is  uniquely  human.  You  can  do  it,  if  you  simply

recognize:  that  they’re  human  too,  that  they  act  out  of

ignorance,  against  their  will,  and  that  you’ll  both  be  dead

before  long.  And,  above  all,  that  they  haven’t  really  hurt

you. They haven’t diminished your ability to choose.



23.  Nature  takes  substance  and  makes  a  horse.  Like  a

sculptor  with  wax.  And  then  melts  it  down  and  uses  the

material  for  a  tree.  Then  for  a  person.  Then  for  something

else. Each existing only brieﬂy.



It  does  the  container  no  harm  to  be  put  together,  and



none to be taken apart.



24. Anger in the face is unnatural. † . . . † or in the end is put

out for good, so that it can’t be rekindled. Try to conclude its

unnaturalness  from  that.  (If  even  the  consciousness  of

acting badly has gone, why go on living?)



25.  Before  long,  nature,  which  controls  it  all,  will  alter

everything you see and use it as material for something else

—over  and  over  again.  So  that  the  world  is  continually

renewed.



26. When people injure you, ask yourself what good or harm

they thought would come of it. If you understand that, you’ll

feel  sympathy  rather  than  outrage  or  anger.  Your  sense  of

good and evil may be the same as theirs, or near it, in which

case  you  have  to  excuse  them.  Or  your  sense  of  good  and

evil may diﬀer from theirs. In which case they’re misguided

and deserve your compassion. Is that so hard?



27. Treat what you don’t have as nonexistent. Look at what

you have, the things you value most, and think of how much

you’d  crave  them  if  you  didn’t  have  them.  But  be  careful.

Don’t feel such satisfaction that you start to overvalue them

—that it would upset you to lose them.



28.  Self-contraction:  the  mind’s  requirements  are  satisﬁed

by doing what we should, and by the calm it brings us.



29. Discard your misperceptions.



Stop being jerked like a puppet.



Limit yourself to the present.



Understand what happens—to you, to others.



Analyze  what  exists,  break  it  all  down:  material  and

cause.



Anticipate your ﬁnal hours.



Other people’s mistakes? Leave them to their makers.



30. To direct your thoughts to what is said. To focus the mind

on what happens and what makes it happen.



31. Wash yourself clean. With simplicity, with humility, with

indiﬀerence to everything but right and wrong.



Care for other human beings. Follow God.



31a. “ . . . all are relative,” it’s been said, “and in reality only

atoms.”  It’s  enough  to  remember  the  ﬁrst  half:  “all  are

relative.” “ Which is little enough. “



32. [On death:] If atoms, dispersed. If oneness, quenched or

changed.



33.  [On  pain:]  Unendurable  pain  brings  its  own  end  with  it.

Chronic pain is always endurable: the intelligence maintains

serenity  by  cutting  itself  oﬀ  from  the  body,  the  mind

remains  undiminished.  And  the  parts  that  pain  aﬀects—let

them speak for themselves, if they can.



34.  [On  Ambition:]  How  their  minds  work,  the  things  they

long for and fear. Events like piles of sand, drift upon drift—

each one soon hidden by the next.



35.  “  ‘If  his  mind  is  ﬁlled  with  nobility,  with  a  grasp  of  all

time,  all  existence,  do  you  think  our  human  life  will  mean

much to him at all?’



“ ‘How could it?’ he said.



“ ‘Or death be very frightening?’



“ ‘Not in the least.’ ”



36. “Kingship: to earn a bad reputation by good deeds.”



37.  Disgraceful:  that  the  mind  should  control  the  face,

should  be  able  to  shape  and  mold  it  as  it  pleases,  but  not

shape and mold itself.



38.  “And  why  should  we  feel  anger  at  the  world?  As  if  the

world would notice!”



39. “May you bring joy to us and those on high.”



40.  “To  harvest  life  like  standing  stalks  of  grain  Grown  and

cut down in turn.”



41.  “If  I  and  my  two  children  cannot  move  the  gods  The

gods must have their reasons.”



42. “For what is just and good is on my side.”



43. No chorus of lamentation, no hysterics.



44.  “Then  the  only  proper  response  for  me  to  make  is  this:

‘You  are  much  mistaken,  my  friend,  if  you  think  that  any

man worth his salt cares about the risk of death and doesn’t

concentrate on this alone: whether what he’s doing is right

or wrong, and his behavior a good man’s or a bad one’s.’ ”



45.  “It’s  like  this,  gentlemen  of  the  jury:  The  spot  where  a

person  decides  to  station  himself,  or  wherever  his

commanding oﬃcer stations  him—well,  I  think  that’s  where

he  ought  to  take  his  stand  and  face  the  enemy,  and  not

worry  about  being  killed,  or  about  anything  but  doing  his

duty.”



46.  “But,  my  good  friend,  consider  the  possibility  that

nobility  and  virtue  are  not  synonymous  with  the  loss  or

preservation  of  one’s  life.  Is  it  not  possible  that  a  real  man

should  forget  about  living  a  certain  number  of  years,  and

should  not  cling  to  life,  but  leave  it  up  to  the  gods,

accepting, as women say, that ‘no one can escape his fate,’

and turn his attention to how he can best live the life before

him?”



47. To watch the courses of the stars as if you revolved with

them.  To  keep  constantly  in  mind  how  the  elements  alter

into one another. Thoughts like this wash oﬀ the mud of life

below.



48. [Plato has it right.] If you want to talk about people, you

need to look down on the earth from above. Herds, armies,

farms; weddings, divorces, births, deaths; noisy courtrooms,

desert  places;  all  the  foreign  peoples;  holidays,  days  of

mourning, market days . . . all mixed together, a harmony of

opposites.



49. Look at the past—empire succeeding empire—and from

that, extrapolate the future: the same thing. No escape from

the rhythm of events.



Which is why observing life for forty years is as good as a



thousand. Would you really see anything new?



50. “ . . . Earth’s oﬀspring back to earth



But all that’s born of heaven



To heaven returns again.”



Either that or the  cluster  of  atoms  pulls  apart and  one  way

or another the insensible elements disperse.



51. “. . . with food and drink and magic spells



Seeking some novel way to frustrate death.”



51a. “To labor cheerfully and so endure



The wind that blows from heaven.”



52.  A  better  wrestler.  But  not  a  better  citizen,  a  better

person, a better resource in tight places, a better forgiver of

faults.



53. Wherever something can be done as the logos shared by

gods and men  dictates, there all  is in  order.  Where there is

proﬁt because our eﬀort is productive, because it advances

in step with our nature, there we have nothing to fear.



54. Everywhere, at each moment, you have the option:



• to accept this event with humility



• to treat this person as he should be treated



•  to  approach  this  thought  with  care,  so  that  nothing

irrational creeps in.



55.  Don’t  pay  attention  to  other  people’s  minds.  Look

straight  ahead,  where  nature  is  leading  you—nature  in

general,  through  the  things  that  happen  to  you;  and  your

own nature, through your own actions.



Everything  has  to  do  what  it  was  made  for.  And  other

things were made for those with logos. In  this  respect  as in

others:  lower  things  exist  for  the  sake  of  higher  ones,  and

higher things for one another.



Now,  the  main  thing  we  were  made  for  is  to  work  with



others.



Secondly,  to  resist  our  body’s  urges.  Because  things

for

driven  by  logos—by 

detachment—to  resist  impulses  and  sensations,  both  of

which  are  merely  corporeal.  Thought  seeks  to  be  their

master,  not  their  subject.  And  so  it  should:  they  were

created for its use.



thought—have 



the  capacity 



And the third thing is to avoid rashness and credulity.



The  mind  that  grasps  this  and  steers  straight  ahead



should be able to hold its own.



56. Think of yourself as dead. You have lived your life. Now

take what’s left and live it properly.



57.  To  love  only  what  happens,  what  was  destined.  No

greater harmony.



58.  In  all  that  happens,  keep  before  your  eyes  those  who

experienced  it  before  you,  and  felt  shock  and  outrage  and

resentment at it.



And now where are they? Nowhere.



Is  that  what  you  want  to  be  like?  Instead  of  avoiding  all

these  distracting  assaults—leaving  the  alarms  and  ﬂight  to

others—and concentrating on what you can do with it all?



Because  you  can  use  it,  treat  it  as  raw  material.  Just  pay

attention,  and  resolve  to  live  up  to  your  own  expectations.

In everything. And when faced with a choice, remember: our

business is with things that really matter.



59.  Dig  deep;  the  water—goodness—is  down  there.  And  as

long as you keep digging, it will keep bubbling up.



60.  What  the  body  needs  is  stability.  To  be  impervious  to

jolts in all it is and does. The cohesiveness and beauty that

intelligence lends to the face—that’s what the body needs.



But it should come without eﬀort.



61. Not a dancer but a wrestler: waiting, poised and dug in,

for sudden assaults.



62. Look at who they really are, the people whose approval

you long for, and what their minds are really like. Then you

won’t  blame  the  ones  who  make  mistakes  they  can’t  help,

and  you  won’t  feel  a  need  for  their  approval.  You  will  have

seen the sources of both—their judgments and their actions.



63. “Against our will, our souls are cut oﬀ from truth.”



Truth, yes, and justice, self-control, kindness . . .



Important  to  keep  this  in  mind.  It  will  make  you  more



patient with other people.



64. For times when you feel pain:



See  that  it  doesn’t  disgrace  you,  or  degrade  your

it  from  acting  rationally  or



intelligence—doesn’t  keep 

unselﬁshly.



And  in  most  cases  what  Epicurus  said  should  help:  that

pain  is  neither  unbearable  nor  unending,  as  long  as  you

keep  in  mind  its  limits  and  don’t  magnify  them  in  your

imagination.



And keep in mind too that pain often comes in disguise—

as  drowsiness,  fever,  loss  of  appetite.  .  .  .  When  you’re

bothered by things like that, remind yourself: “I’m giving in

to pain.”



65.  Take  care  that  you  don’t  treat  inhumanity  as  it  treats

human beings.



66. How do we know that Telauges wasn’t a better man than

Socrates?



It’s  not  enough  to  ask  whether  Socrates’  death  was

nobler, whether he debated with the sophists more adeptly,

whether  he  showed  greater  endurance  by  spending  the

night out in the cold, and when he was ordered to arrest the

man  from  Salamis  decided  it  was  preferable  to  refuse,  and

“swaggered about the streets” (which one could reasonably

doubt).



What matters is what kind of soul he had.



Whether he was satisﬁed to treat men with justice and the

temper



reverence  and  didn’t 



lose  his 



gods  with 



unpredictably  at  evil  done  by  others,  didn’t  make  himself

the  slave  of  other  people’s  ignorance,  didn’t  treat  anything

that  nature  did  as  abnormal,  or  put  up  with  it  as  an

unbearable  imposition,  didn’t  put  his  mind  in  his  body’s

keeping.



67.  Nature  did  not  blend  things  so  inextricably  that  you

can’t draw your own boundaries—place your own well-being

in  your  own  hands.  It’s  quite  possible  to  be  a  good  man

without anyone realizing it. Remember that.



And this too: you don’t need much to live happily. And just

because you’ve abandoned your hopes of becoming a great

thinker  or  scientist,  don’t  give  up  on  attaining  freedom,

achieving humility, serving others, obeying God.



68. To live life in peace, immune to all compulsion. Let them

scream  whatever  they  want.  Let  animals  dismember  this

soft  ﬂesh  that  covers  you.  How  would  any  of  that  stop  you

from  keeping  your  mind  calm—reliably  sizing  up  what’s

around  you—and  ready  to  make  good  use  of  whatever

happens?  So  that  Judgment  can  look  the  event  in  the  eye

and say, “This is what you really are, regardless of what you

may  look  like.”  While  Adaptability  adds,  “You’re  just  what  I

was looking for.” Because to me the present is a chance for

the exercise of rational virtue—civic virtue—in short, the art

that  men  share  with  gods.  Both  treat  whatever  happens  as

wholly  natural;  not  novel  or  hard  to  deal  with,  but  familiar

and easily handled.



69. Perfection of character: to live your last day, every day,

without frenzy, or sloth, or pretense.



70. The gods live forever and yet they don’t seem annoyed

at  having  to  put  up  with  human  beings  and  their  behavior



throughout  eternity.  And  not  only  put  up  with  but  actively

care for them.



And  you—on  the  verge  of  death—you  still  refuse  to  care



for them, although you’re one of them yourself.



71. It’s silly to try to escape other people’s faults. They are

inescapable. Just try to escape your own.



72.  Whenever  the  force  that  makes  us  rational  and  social

encounters something that is neither, then it can reasonably

regard it as inferior.



73. You’ve given aid and they’ve received it. And yet, like an

idiot,  you  keep  holding  out  for  more:  to  be  credited  with  a

Good Deed, to be repaid in kind. Why?



74. No one objects to what is useful to him.



To be of use to others is natural.



Then don’t object to what is useful to you—being of use.



75.  Nature  willed  the  creation  of  the  world.  Either  all  that

exists  follows  logically  or  even  those  things  to  which  the

world’s  intelligence  most  directs  its  will  are  completely

random.



A source of serenity in more situations than one.



