Book Eight+



1.  Another  encouragement  to  humility:  you  can’t  claim  to

have  lived  your  life  as  a  philosopher—not  even  your  whole

adulthood.  You  can  see  for  yourself  how  far  you  are  from

philosophy. And so can many others. You’re tainted. It’s not

so  easy  now—to  have  a  reputation  as  a  philosopher.  And

your position is an obstacle as well.



So  you  know  how  things  stand.  Now  forget  what  they

think of you. Be satisﬁed if you can live the rest of your life,

however short, as your nature demands. Focus on that, and

don’t  let  anything  distract  you.  You’ve  wandered  all  over

and  ﬁnally  realized  that  you  never  found  what  you  were

after: how to live. Not in syllogisms, not in money, or fame,

or self-indulgence. Nowhere.



—Then where is it to be found?



In doing what human nature requires.



—How?



Through  ﬁrst  principles.  Which  should  govern  your



intentions and your actions.



—What principles?



Those  to  do  with  good  and  evil.  That  nothing  is  good

except what leads to fairness, and self-control, and courage,



and  free  will.  And  nothing  bad  except  what  does  the

opposite.



2.  For  every  action,  ask:  How  does  it  aﬀect  me?  Could  I

change my mind about it?



But soon I’ll be dead, and the slate’s empty. So this is the

only question: Is it the action of a responsible being, part of

society, and subject to the same decrees as God?



3.  Alexander  and  Caesar  and  Pompey.  Compared  with

Diogenes,  Heraclitus,  Socrates?  The  philosophers  knew  the

what, the why, the how. Their minds were their own.



The others? Nothing but anxiety and enslavement.



4.  You  can  hold  your  breath  until  you  turn  blue,  but  they’ll

still go on doing it.



5. The ﬁrst step: Don’t be anxious. Nature controls it all. And

before  long  you’ll  be  no  one,  nowhere—like  Hadrian,  like

Augustus.



The second step: Concentrate on what you have to do. Fix

your  eyes  on  it.  Remind  yourself  that  your  task  is  to  be  a

good human being; remind yourself what nature demands of

people.  Then  do  it,  without  hesitation,  and  speak  the  truth

as  you  see  it.  But  with  kindness.  With  humility.  Without

hypocrisy.



6. Nature’s job: to shift things elsewhere, to transform them,

to  pick  them  up  and  move  them  here  and  there.  Constant

alteration.  But  not  to  worry:  there’s  nothing  new  here.

Everything is familiar. Even the proportions are unchanged.



7.  Nature  of  any  kind  thrives  on  forward  progress.  And

progress for a rational mind means not accepting falsehood



or  uncertainty  in  its  perceptions,  making  unselﬁsh  actions

its  only  aim,  seeking  and  shunning  only  the  things  it  has

control  over,  embracing  what  nature  demands  of  it—the

nature  in  which  it  participates,  as  the  leaf’s  nature  does  in

the  tree’s.  Except  that  the  nature  shared  by  the  leaf  is

to

without  consciousness  or 

impediments.  Whereas  that  shared  by  human  beings  is

without impediments, and rational, and just, since it allots to

each  and  every  thing  an  equal  and  proportionate  share  of

time, being, purpose, action, chance. Examine it closely. Not

whether  they’re 

in  the

aggregate: this weighed against that.



identical  point  by  point,  but 



reason,  and 



subject 



8.  No  time  for  reading.  For  controlling  your  arrogance,  yes.

For  overcoming  pain  and  pleasure,  yes.  For  outgrowing

ambition,  yes.  For  not 

feeling  anger  at  stupid  and

unpleasant  people—even  for  caring  about  them—for  that,

yes.



9.  Don’t  be  overheard  complaining  about  life  at  court.  Not

even to yourself.



10. Remorse is annoyance at yourself for having passed up

something that’s to your beneﬁt. But if it’s to your beneﬁt it

must  be  good—something  a  truly  good  person  would  be

concerned about.



But no truly good person would feel remorse at passing up



pleasure.



So it cannot be to your beneﬁt, or good.



11.  What  is  this,  fundamentally?  What  is  its  nature  and

substance,  its  reason  for  being?  What  is  it  doing  in  the

world? How long is it here for?



12.  When  you  have  trouble  getting  out  of  bed  in  the

morning,  remember  that  your  deﬁning  characteristic—what

deﬁnes  a  human  being—is  to  work  with  others.  Even

animals  know  how  to  sleep.  And  it’s  the  characteristic

activity that’s the more natural one—more innate and more

satisfying.



13.  Apply  them  constantly,  to  everything  that  happens:

Physics. Ethics. Logic.



14.  When  you  have  to  deal  with  someone,  ask  yourself:

What  does  he  mean  by  good  and  bad?  If  he  thinks  x  or  y

about  pleasure  and  pain  (and  what  produces  them),  about

fame  and  disgrace,  about  death  and  life,  then  it  shouldn’t

shock or surprise you when he does x or y.



In fact, I’ll remind myself that he has no real choice.



15.  Remember:  you  shouldn’t  be  surprised  that  a  ﬁg  tree

produces ﬁgs, nor the world what it produces. A good doctor

isn’t  surprised  when  his  patients  have  fevers,  or  a

helmsman when the wind blows against him.



16.  Remember  that  to  change  your  mind  and  to  accept

correction  are  free  acts  too.  The  action  is  yours,  based  on

your own will, your own decision—and your own mind.



17. If it’s in your control, why do you do it? If it’s in someone

else’s, then who are you blaming? Atoms? The gods? Stupid

either way.



Blame  no  one.  Set  people  straight,  if  you  can.  If  not,  just

repair  the  damage.  And  suppose  you  can’t  do  that  either.

Then where does blaming people get you?



No pointless actions.



18.  What  dies  doesn’t  vanish.  It  stays  here  in  the  world,

transformed,  dissolved,  as  parts  of  the  world,  and  of  you.

Which are transformed in turn—without grumbling.



19.  Everything  is  here  for  a  purpose,  from  horses  to  vine

shoots.  What’s  surprising  about  that?  Even  the  sun  will  tell

you,  “I  have  a  purpose,”  and  the  other  gods  as  well.  And

why  were  you born?  For  pleasure?  See  if  that  answer  will

stand up to questioning.



20.  Nature  is  like  someone  throwing  a  ball  in  the  air,

gauging  its  rise  and  arc—and  where  it  will  fall.  And  what

does  the  ball  gain  as  it  ﬂies  upward?  Or  lose  when  it

plummets to earth?



What does the bubble gain from its existence? Or lose by



bursting?



And the same for a candle.



21. Turn it inside out: What is it like? What is it like old? Or

sick? Or selling itself on the streets?



They  all  die  soon—praiser  and  praised,  rememberer  and

remembered.  Remembered  in  these  parts  or  in  a  corner  of

them.  Even  there  they  don’t  all  agree  with  each  other  (or

even with themselves).



And the whole earth a mere point in space.



22. Stick to what’s in front of you—idea, action, utterance.



22a. This is what you deserve. You could be good today. But

instead you choose tomorrow.



23. What I do? I attribute it to human beneﬁcence.



What  is  done  to  me?  I  accept  it—and  attribute  it  to  the



gods, and that source from which all things together ﬂow.



24.  Like  the  baths—oil,  sweat,  dirt,  grayish  water,  all  of  it

disgusting.



The whole of life, all of the visible world.



25.  Verus,  leaving  Lucilla  behind,  then  Lucilla.  Maximus,

leaving

leaving  Secunda.  And  Secunda.  Diotimus, 

Epitynchanus.  Then  Epitynchanus.  Faustina, 

leaving

Antoninus. Then Antoninus.



So with all of them.



Hadrian, leaving Celer. And Celer.



Where  have  they  gone,  the  brilliant,  the  insightful  ones,

the  proud?  Brilliant  as  Charax  and  Demetrius  the  Platonist

and  Eudaemon  and  the  rest  of  them.  Short-lived  creatures,

long  dead.  Some  of  them  not  remembered  at  all,  some

become legends, some lost even to legend.



So remember: your components will be scattered too, the

life  within  you  quenched.  Or  marching  orders  and  another

posting.



26. Joy for humans lies in human actions.



Human  actions:  kindness  to  others,  contempt  for  the

senses,  the  interrogation  of  appearances,  observation  of

nature and of events in nature.



27. Three relationships:



i. with the body you inhabit;



ii.  with  the  divine,  the  cause  of  everything  in  all

things;



iii. with the people around you.



28.  Either  pain  aﬀects  the  body  (which  is  the  body’s

problem) or it aﬀects the soul. But the soul can choose not

to  be  aﬀected,  preserving 

its  own

tranquillity.  All  our  decisions,  urges,  desires,  aversions  lie

within. No evil can touch them.



its  own  serenity, 



29.  To  erase  false  perceptions,  tell  yourself:  I  have  it  in  me

to  keep  my  soul  from  evil,  lust  and  all  confusion.  To  see

things  as  they  are  and  treat  them  as  they  deserve.  Don’t

overlook this innate ability.



30.  To  speak  to  the  Senate—or  anyone—in  the  right  tone,

without being overbearing. To choose the right words.



31.  Augustus’s  court:  his  wife,  his  daughter,  his  grandsons,

his  stepsons,  his  sister,  Agrippa,  the  relatives,  servants,

friends, Areius, Maecenas, the doctors, the sacriﬁcial priests

. . . the whole court, dead.



And  consider  the  others  .  .  .  not  just  the  deaths  of



individuals (like the family of the Pompeys).



line 



That 



they  write  on 



surviving

descendant.”  Consider  their  ancestors’  anxiety—that  there

be a successor. But someone has to be the last. There, too,

the death of a whole house.



tombs—“last 



32.  You  have  to  assemble  your  life  yourself—action  by

action. And be satisﬁed if each one achieves its goal, as far

as it can. No one can keep that from happening.



—But there are external obstacles. . . .



Not to behaving with justice, self-control, and good sense.



—Well, but perhaps to some more concrete action.



But if you accept the obstacle and work with what you’re

given,  an  alternative  will  present  itself—another  piece  of

what you’re trying to assemble. Action by action.



33.  To  accept  it  without  arrogance,  to  let  it  go  with

indiﬀerence.



34.  Have  you  ever  seen  a  severed  hand  or  foot,  or  a

decapitated  head,  just  lying  somewhere  far  away  from  the

body it belonged to . . . ? That’s what we do to ourselves—or

try to—when we rebel against what happens to us, when we

segregate ourselves. Or when we do something selﬁsh.



You  have  torn  yourself  away  from  unity—your  natural

state,  one  you  were  born  to  share  in.  Now  you’ve  cut

yourself oﬀ from it.



But  you  have  one  advantage  here:  you  can  reattach

yourself. A privilege God has granted to no other part of no



other  whole—to  be  separated,  cut  away,  and  reunited.  But

look  how  he’s  singled  us  out.  He’s  allowed  us  not  to  be

broken  oﬀ  in  the  ﬁrst  place,  and  when  we  are  he’s  allowed

us to return, to graft ourselves back on, and take up our old

position once again: part of a whole.



35.  We  have  various  abilities,  present  in  all  rational

creatures as in the nature of rationality itself. And this is one

of  them.  Just  as  nature  takes  every  obstacle,  every

impediment,  and  works  around  it—turns  it  to  its  purposes,

incorporates it into itself—so, too, a rational being can turn

each  setback  into  raw  material  and  use  it  to  achieve  its

goal.



36. Don’t let your imagination be crushed by life as a whole.

Don’t  try  to  picture  everything  bad  that  could  possibly

happen.  Stick  with  the  situation  at  hand,  and  ask,  “Why  is

this  so  unbearable?  Why  can’t  I  endure  it?”  You’ll  be

embarrassed to answer.



Then remind yourself that past and future have no power

over  you.  Only  the  present—and  even  that  can  be

minimized. Just mark oﬀ its limits. And if your mind tries to

claim that it can’t hold out against that . . . well, then, heap

shame upon it.



37.  Are  Pantheia  or  Pergamos  still  keeping  watch  at  the

tomb  of  Verus?  Chabrias  or  Diotimus  at  the  tomb  of

Hadrian? Of course they aren’t. Would the emperors know it

if they were?



And even if they knew, would it please them?



And even if it did, would the mourners live forever? Were

they, too, not fated to grow old and then die? And when that

happened, what would the emperors do?



38. The stench of decay. Rotting meat in a bag.



Look at it clearly. If you can.



39. “To the best of my judgment, when I look at the human

character I see no virtue placed there to counter justice. But

I see one to counter pleasure: self-control.”



40. Stop perceiving the pain you imagine and you’ll remain

completely unaﬀected.



—“You?”



Your logos.



—But I’m not just logos.



Fine. Just don’t let the logos be injured. If anything else is,



let it decide that for itself.



41. For animate beings, “harmful” is whatever obstructs the

operation  of  their  senses—or  the  fulﬁllment  of  what  they

intend.  Similar  obstructions  constitute  harm  to  plants.  So

too  for  rational  creatures,  anything  that  obstructs  the

operation of the mind is harmful.



Apply this to yourself.



Do  pain  and  pleasure  have  their  hooks  in  you?  Let  the

senses  deal  with  it.  Are  there  obstacles  to  your  action?  If

you  failed  to  reckon  with  the  possibility,  then  that  would

harm you, as a rational being. But if you use common sense,

you  haven’t  been  harmed  or  even  obstructed.  No  one  can

obstruct  the  operations  of  the  mind.  Nothing  can  get  at

them—not  ﬁre or steel, not tyrants,  not abuse—nothing.  As

long as it’s “a sphere . . . in perfect stillness.”



42. I have no right to do myself an injury. Have I ever injured

anyone else if I could avoid it?



43. People ﬁnd pleasure in diﬀerent ways. I ﬁnd it in keeping

my  mind  clear.  In  not  turning  away  from  people  or  the

things  that  happen  to  them.  In  accepting  and  welcoming

everything I see. In treating each thing as it deserves.



44. Give yourself a gift: the present moment.



People  out 



for  posthumous 



the

Generations To Come will be the same annoying people they

know now. And just as mortal. What does it matter to you if

they say x about you, or think y?



forget 



fame 



that 



45. Lift me up and hurl me. Wherever you will. My spirit will

be gracious to me there—gracious and satisﬁed—as long as

its existence and actions match its nature.



Is  there  any  reason  why  my  soul  should  suﬀer  and  be

degraded—miserable,  tense,  huddled,  frightened?  How

could there be?



46.  What  humans  experience  is  part  of  human  experience.

The  experience  of  the  ox  is  part  of  the  experience  of  oxen,

as the vine’s is of the vine, and the stone’s what is proper to

stones.



Nothing  that  can  happen  is  unusual  or  unnatural,  and

there’s  no  sense  in  complaining.  Nature  does  not  make  us

endure the unendurable.



47.  External  things  are  not  the  problem. 

assessment of them. Which you can erase right now.



It’s  your



If  the  problem  is something  in  your  own character,  who’s



stopping you from setting your mind straight?



And  if  it’s  that  you’re  not  doing  something  you  think  you



should be, why not just do it?



—But there are insuperable obstacles.



Then  it’s  not  a  problem.  The  cause  of  your  inaction  lies



outside you.



—But how can I go on living with that undone?



Then  depart,  with  a  good  conscience,  as  if  you’d  done  it,



embracing the obstacles too.



48.  Remember  that  when  it  withdraws  into  itself  and  ﬁnds

contentment there, the mind is invulnerable. It does nothing

against  its  will,  even  if  its  resistance  is  irrational.  And  if  its

judgment is deliberate and grounded in logic . . . ?



The mind without passions is a fortress. No place is more

secure. Once we take refuge there we are safe forever. Not

to see this is ignorance. To see it and not seek safety means

misery.



49.  Nothing  but  what  you  get  from  ﬁrst  impressions.  That

someone  has  insulted  you,  for  instance.  That—but  not  that

it’s done you any harm. The fact that my son is sick—that I

can  see.  But  “that  he  might  die  of  it,”  no.  Stick  with  ﬁrst

impressions.  Don’t  extrapolate.  And  nothing  can  happen  to

you.



Or  extrapolate.  From  a  knowledge  of  all  that  can  happen



in the world.



50. The cucumber is bitter? Then throw it out.



There are brambles in the path? Then go around them.



That’s all you need to know. Nothing more. Don’t demand

to  know  “why  such  things  exist.”  Anyone  who  understands

the world will laugh at you, just as a carpenter would if you

seemed  shocked  at  ﬁnding  sawdust  in  his  workshop,  or  a

shoemaker at scraps of leather left over from work.



Of  course,  they  have  a  place  to  dispose  of  these;  nature

has no door to sweep things out of. But the wonderful thing

about  its  workmanship  is  how,  faced  with  that  limitation,  it

takes  everything  within  it  that  seems  broken,  old  and

useless, transforms it into itself, and makes new things from

it. So that it doesn’t need material from any outside source,

or anywhere to dispose of what’s left over. It relies on itself

for all it needs: space, material, and labor.



51.  No  carelessness  in  your  actions.  No  confusion  in  your

words.  No  imprecision  in  your  thoughts.  No  retreating  into

your own soul, or trying to escape it. No overactivity.



They kill you, cut you with knives, shower you with curses.

And  that  somehow  cuts  your  mind  oﬀ  from  clearness,  and

sanity, and self-control, and justice?



A  man  standing  by  a  spring  of  clear,  sweet  water  and

cursing  it.  While  the  fresh  water  keeps  on  bubbling  up.  He

can shovel mud into it, or dung, and the stream will carry it

away, wash itself clean, remain unstained.



To have that. Not a cistern but a perpetual spring.



How?  By  working  to  win  your  freedom.  Hour  by  hour.



Through patience, honesty, humility.



52. Not to know what the world is is to be ignorant of where

you are.



Not to know why it’s here is to be ignorant of who you are.



And what it is.



Not  to  know  any  of  this  is  to  be  ignorant  of  why  you’re



here.



And what are we to make of anyone who cares about the

applause of such people, who don’t know where or who they

are?



53. You want praise from people who kick themselves every

ﬁfteen  minutes,  the  approval  of  people  who  despise

themselves.  (Is  it  a  sign  of  self-respect  to  regret  nearly

everything you do?)



54.  To  join  ourselves  not  just  to  the  air  surrounding  us,

through breath,  but  to  the  reason  that  embraces  all  things,

through  thought.  Reason  is  just  as  omnipresent,  just  as

widely diﬀused in those who accept it as air is in those who

breathe.



55.  The  existence  of  evil  does  not  harm  the  world.  And  an

individual  act  of  evil  does  not  harm  the  victim.  Only  one

person  is  harmed  by  it—and  he  can  stop  being  harmed  as

soon as he decides to.



56. Other people’s wills are as independent of mine as their

breath  and  bodies.  We  may  exist  for  the  sake  of  one

another,  but  our  will  rules  its  own  domain.  Otherwise  the

harm  they  do  would  cause  harm  to  me.  Which  is  not  what

God intended—for my happiness to rest with someone else.



57. We speak of the sun’s light as “pouring down on us,” as

“pouring over us” in all directions. Yet it’s never poured out.

Because it doesn’t really pour; it extends. Its beams (aktai)

get their name from their extension (ekteinesthai).



To  see  the  nature  of  a  sunbeam,  look  at  light  as  it  falls

through a narrow  opening  into  a dark room.  It extends in  a

straight line, striking any solid object that stands in its way

and  blocks  the  space  beyond  it.  There  it  remains—not

vanishing, or falling away.



That’s  what  the  outpouring—the  diﬀusion—of  thought

should  be  like:  not  emptied  out,  but  extended.  And  not

striking  at  obstacles  with  fury  and  violence,  or  falling  away

before  them,  but  holding  its  ground  and  illuminating  what

receives it.



What doesn’t transmit light creates its own darkness.



58.  Fear  of  death  is  fear  of  what  we  may  experience.

Nothing at all, or something quite new. But if we experience

nothing,  we  can  experience  nothing  bad.  And  if  our

experience changes, then our existence will change with it—

change, but not cease.



59. People exist for one another. You can instruct or endure

them.



60.  An  arrow  has  one  motion  and  the  mind  another.  Even

when pausing, even when weighing conclusions, the mind is

moving forward, toward its goal.



61. To enter others’ minds and let them enter yours.



