Book Ten+



1. To my soul:



Are you ever going to achieve goodness? Ever going to be

simple, whole, and naked—as plain to see as the body that

contains  you?  Know  what  an  aﬀectionate  and  loving

disposition  would  feel  like?  Ever  be  fulﬁlled,  ever  stop

desiring—lusting and longing for people and things to enjoy?

Or for more time to enjoy them? Or for some other place or

country—“a more temperate clime”? Or for people easier to

get along with? And instead be satisﬁed with what you have,

and accept the present—all of it. And convince yourself that

everything  is the  gift  of  the  gods,  that  things  are good and

always  will  be,  whatever  they  decide  and  have  in  store  for

the  preservation  of  that  perfect  entity—good  and  just  and

beautiful,  creating  all  things,  connecting  and  embracing

them, and gathering in their separated fragments to create

more like them.



Will you ever take your stand as a fellow citizen with gods

and  human  beings,  blaming  no  one,  deserving  no  one’s

censure?



2. Focus on what nature demands, as if you were governed

by  that  alone.  Then  do  that,  and  accept  it,  unless  your

nature as a living being would be degraded by it.



Then focus on what that nature demands, and accept that

too—unless  your  nature  as  a  rational  being  would  be

degraded by it.



And, of course, “rational” also implies “civic.”



Follow these guidelines and don’t waste time on anything



else.



3. Everything that happens is either endurable or not.



If it’s endurable, then endure it. Stop complaining.



If  it’s  unendurable  .  .  .  then  stop  complaining.  Your



destruction will mean its end as well.



Just  remember:  you  can  endure  anything  your  mind  can



make endurable, by treating it as in your interest to do so.



In your interest, or in your nature.



4. If they’ve made a mistake, correct them gently and show

them where they went wrong. If you can’t do that, then the

blame lies with you. Or no one.



5.  Whatever  happens  to  you  has  been  waiting  to  happen

since  the  beginning  of  time.  The  twining  strands  of  fate

wove  both  of  them  together:  your  own  existence  and  the

things that happen to you.



6. Whether it’s atoms or nature, the ﬁrst thing to be said is

this:  I  am  a  part  of  a  world  controlled  by  nature.  Secondly:

that I have a relationship with other, similar parts. And with

that  in  mind  I  have  no  right,  as  a  part,  to  complain  about

what  is  assigned  me  by  the  whole.  Because  what  beneﬁts

the whole can’t harm the parts, and the whole does nothing

that  doesn’t  beneﬁt  it.  That’s  a  trait  shared  by  all  natures,

but  the  nature  of  the  world  is  deﬁned  by  a  second

characteristic  as  well:  no  outside  force  can  compel  it  to

cause itself harm.



So  by  keeping  in  mind  the  whole  I  form  a  part  of,  I’ll

accept  whatever  happens.  And  because  of  my  relationship



to  other  parts,  I  will  do  nothing  selﬁsh,  but  aim  instead  to

join them, to direct my every action toward what beneﬁts us

all  and  to  avoid  what  doesn’t.  If  I  do  all  that,  then  my  life

should  go  smoothly.  As  you  might  expect  a  citizen’s  life  to

go—one  whose  actions  serve  his  fellow  citizens,  and  who

embraces the community’s decree.



7.  The  whole  is  compounded  by  nature  of  individual  parts,

whose destruction is inevitable (“destruction” here meaning

transformation).  If  the  process  is  harmful  to  the  parts  and

unavoidable,  then  it’s  hard  to  see  how  the  whole  can  run

smoothly, with parts of it passing from one state to another,

all of them built only to be destroyed in diﬀerent ways. Does

nature  set  out  to  cause  its  own  components  harm,  and

make them vulnerable to it—indeed, predestined to it? Or is

it  oblivious  to  what  goes  on?  Neither  one  seems  very

plausible.



But  suppose  we  throw  out  “nature”  and  explain  these

things  through  inherent  properties.  It  would  still  be  absurd

to  say  that the  individual  things  in  the  world are inherently

prone  to  change,  and  at  the  same  time  be  astonished  at  it

it  was  happening

or  complain—on  the  grounds  that 

“contrary  to  nature.”  And  least  of  all  when  things  return  to

the state from which they came. Because our elements are

either  simply  dispersed,  or  are  subject  to  a  kind  of

gravitation—the  solid  portions  being  pulled  toward  earth,

and  what  is  ethereal  drawn  into  the  air,  until  they’re

absorbed  into  the  universal  logos—which  is  subject  to

periodic  conﬂagrations,  or  renewed  through  continual

change.



And  don’t  imagine  either  that  those  elements—the  solid

ones  and  the  ethereal—are  with  us  from  our  birth.  Their

inﬂux  took  place  yesterday,  or  the  day  before—from  the

food we ate, the air we breathed.



And  that’s  what  changes—not  the  person  your  mother



gave birth to.



—But if you’re inextricably linked to it through your sense



of individuality?



That’s not what we’re talking about here.



8.  Epithets  for  yourself:  Upright.  Modest.  Straightforward.

Sane. Cooperative. Disinterested.



Try not to exchange them for others.



And  if  you  should  forfeit  them,  set  about  getting  them



back.



Keep in mind that “sanity” means understanding things—

each individual thing—for what they are. And not losing the

thread.



And  “cooperation”  means  accepting  what  nature  assigns



you—accepting it willingly.



And  “disinterest”  means  that  the  intelligence  should  rise

above  the  movements  of  the  ﬂesh—the  rough  and  the

smooth  alike.  Should  rise  above  fame,  above  death,  and

everything like them.



If  you  maintain  your  claim  to  these  epithets—without

caring  if  others  apply  them  to  you  or  not—you’ll  become  a

new  person,  living  a  new  life.  To  keep  on  being  the  person

that  you’ve  been—to  keep  being  mauled  and  degraded  by

the life you’re living—is to be devoid of sense and much too

fond  of  life.  Like  those  animal  ﬁghters  at  the  games—torn

half to pieces, covered in blood and gore, and still pleading

to  be  held  over  till  tomorrow  .  .  .  to  be  bitten  and  clawed

again.



Set  sail,  then,  with  this  handful  of  epithets  to  guide  you.

And  steer  a  steady  course,  if  you  can.  Like  an  emigrant  to

the islands of the blest. And if you feel yourself adrift—as if

you’ve  lost  control—then  hope  for  the  best,  and  put  in

somewhere where you can regain it. Or leave life altogether,

not in anger, but matter-of-factly, straightforwardly, without

arrogance,  in  the  knowledge  that  you’ve  at  least  done  that

much with your life.



And as you try to keep these epithets in mind, it will help

you  a  great  deal  to  keep  the  gods  in  mind  as  well.  What

they  want  is  not  ﬂattery,  but  for  rational  things  to  be  like

them. For ﬁgs to do what ﬁgs were meant to do—and dogs,

and bees . . . and people.



9.  Operatics,  combat  and  confusion.  Sloth  and  servility.

Every  day  they  blot  out  those  sacred  principles  of  yours—

which you daydream thoughtlessly about, or just let slide.



Your actions and perceptions need to aim:



• at accomplishing practical ends



• at the exercise of thought



at  maintaining 



on

• 

understanding.  An  unobtrusive  conﬁdence—hidden  in

plain sight.



conﬁdence 



founded 



a 



When  will  you  let  yourself  enjoy  straightforwardness?

Seriousness?  Or  understanding 

individual  things—their

nature  and  substance,  their  place  in  the  world,  their  life

span, their composition, who can possess them, whose they

are to give and to receive?



10.  Spiders  are  proud  of  catching  ﬂies,  men  of  catching

hares, ﬁsh in a net, boars, bears, Sarmatians . . .



Criminal psychology.



11.  How  they  all  change  into  one  another—acquire  the

ability  to  see  that.  Apply  it  constantly;  use  it  to  train

yourself. Nothing is as conducive to spiritual growth.



11a.  He  has  stripped  away  his  body  and—realizing  that  at

some point soon he will have to abandon mankind and leave

all  this  behind—has  dedicated  himself  to  serving  justice  in

all he does, and nature in all that happens. What people say

or  think  about  him,  or  how  they  treat  him,  isn’t  something

he  worries  about.  Only  these  two  questions:  Is  what  he’s

doing now the right thing to be doing? Does he accept and

welcome what he’s been assigned? He has stripped away all

other occupations, all other tasks. He wants only to travel a

straight path—to God, by way of law.



12.  Why  all  this  guesswork?  You  can  see  what  needs  to  be

done.  If  you  can  see  the  road,  follow  it.  Cheerfully,  without

turning  back.  If  not,  hold  up  and  get  the  best  advice  you

can.  If  anything  gets  in  the  way,  forge  on  ahead,  making

good use of what you have on hand, sticking to what seems

right. (The best goal to achieve, and the one we fall short of

when we fail.)



12a.  To  follow  the  logos  in  all  things  is  to  be  relaxed  and

energetic, joyful and serious at once.



13. When you wake up, ask yourself:



Does it make any diﬀerence to you if other people blame



you for doing what’s right?



It makes no diﬀerence.



Have you forgotten what the people who are so vociferous

in praise or blame of others are like as they sleep and eat?

Forgotten  their  behavior,  their  fears,  their  desires,  their

thefts  and  depredations—not  physical  ones,  but  those

committed  by  what  should  be  highest  in  them?  What

creates, when it chooses, loyalty, humility, truth, order, well-

being.



14. Nature gives and nature takes away. Anyone with sense

and humility will tell her, “Give and take as you please,” not

out of deﬁance, but out of obedience and goodwill.



15. Only a short time left. Live as if you were alone—out in

the  wilderness.  No  diﬀerence  between  here  and  there:  the

city that you live in is the world.



Let  people  see  someone  living  naturally,  and  understand

what  that  means.  Let  them  kill  him  if  they  can’t  stand  it.

(Better than living like this.)



16. To stop talking about what the good man is like, and just

be one.



17.  Continual  awareness  of  all  time  and  space,  of  the  size

and  life  span  of  the  things  around  us.  A  grape  seed  in

inﬁnite space. A half twist of a corkscrew against eternity.



18.  Bear  in  mind  that  everything  that  exists  is  already

in  transition,  subject  to

fraying  at  the  edges,  and 

fragmentation and to rot.



Or that everything was born to die.



19.  How  they  act  when  they  eat  and  sleep  and  mate  and

defecate  and  all  the  rest.  Then  when  they  order  and  exult,

or rage and thunder from on high. And yet, just consider the



things they submitted to a moment ago, and the reasons for

it—and the things they’ll submit to again before very long.



20.  Each  of  us  needs  what  nature  gives  us,  when  nature

gives it.



21.  “The  earth  knows  longing  for  the  rain,  the  sky/knows

longing . . .” And the world longs to create what will come to

be. I tell it “I share your longing.”



(And isn’t that what we mean by “inclined to happen”?)



22. Possibilities:



i. To keep on living (you should be used to it by now)



ii. To end it (it was your choice, after all)



iii. To die (having met your obligations)



Those are the only options. Reason for optimism.



23. Keep always before you that “this is no diﬀerent from an

empty  ﬁeld,”  and  the  things  in  it  are  the  same  as  on  a

mountaintop,  on  the  seashore,  wherever.  Plato  gets  to  the

heart  of  it:  “fencing  a  sheepfold  in  the  mountains,  and

milking goats or sheep.”



24. My mind. What is it? What am I making of it? What am I

using it for?



Is it empty of thought?



Isolated and torn loose from those around it?



Melted into ﬂesh and blended with it, so that it shares its



urges?



25. When a slave runs away from his master, we call him a

fugitive slave. But the law of nature is a master too, and to

break it is to become a fugitive.



To  feel  grief,  anger  or  fear  is  to  try  to  escape  from

something  decreed  by  the  ruler  of  all  things,  now  or  in  the

past  or  in  the  future.  And  that  ruler  is  law,  which  governs

what happens to each of us. To feel grief or anger or fear is

to become a fugitive—a fugitive from justice.



26. He deposits his sperm and leaves. And then a force not

his takes it and goes to work, and creates a child.



This . . . from that?



Or:



He  pours  food  down  his  throat.  And  then  a  force  not  his

takes  it  and  creates  sensations,  desires,  daily  life,  physical

strength and so much else besides.



To look at these things going on silently and see the force

that  drives  them.  As  we  see  the  force  that  pushes  things

and pulls them. Not with our eyes, but just as clearly.



27. To bear in mind constantly that all of this has happened

before.  And  will  happen  again—the  same  plot 

from

beginning  to  end,  the  identical  staging.  Produce  them  in

your  mind,  as  you  know  them  from  experience  or  from

history:  the  court  of  Hadrian,  of  Antoninus.  The  courts  of

Philip,  Alexander,  Croesus.  All  just  the  same.  Only  the

people diﬀerent.



28.  People  who  feel  hurt  and  resentment:  picture  them  as

the pig at the sacriﬁce, kicking and squealing all the way.



Like  the  man  alone  in  his  bed,  silently  weeping  over  the



chains that bind us.



That  everything  has  to  submit.  But  only  rational  beings



can do so voluntarily.



29.  Stop  whatever  you’re  doing  for  a  moment  and  ask

yourself: Am I afraid of death because I won’t be able to do

this anymore?



30. When faced with people’s bad behavior, turn around and

ask when you have acted like that. When you saw money as

a  good,  or  pleasure,  or  social  position.  Your  anger  will

subside  as  soon  as  you  recognize  that  they  acted  under

compulsion (what else could they do?).



Or remove the compulsion, if you can.



31.  When  you  look at Satyron,  see  Socraticus,  or Eutyches,

or Hymen.



When you look at Euphrates, see Eutychion or Silvanus.



With Alciphron, see Tropaeophorus.



When you look at Xenophon, see Crito or Severus.



When you look at yourself, see any of the emperors.



And  the  same  with  everyone  else.  Then  let  it  hit  you:



Where are they now?



Nowhere . . . or wherever.



That  way  you’ll  see  human  life  for  what  it  is.  Smoke.

Nothing.  Especially  when  you  recall  that  once  things  alter

they cease to exist through all the endless years to come.



Then why such turmoil? To live your brief life rightly, isn’t



that enough?



The  raw  material  you’re  missing,  the  opportunities  .  .  .  !

What  is  any  of  this  but  training—training  for  your logos,  in

life observed accurately, scientiﬁcally.



So keep at it, until it’s fully digested. As a strong stomach

digests  whatever  it  eats.  As  a  blazing  ﬁre  takes  whatever

you throw on it, and makes it light and ﬂame.



32.  That  no  one  can  say  truthfully  that  you  are  not  a

straightforward  or  honest  person.  That  anyone  who  thinks

that believes a falsehood. The responsibility is all yours; no

one  can  stop  you  from  being  honest  or  straightforward.

Simply  resolve not to  go  on living  if  you  aren’t. It would be

contrary to the logos.



33.  Given  the  material  we’re  made  of,  what’s  the  sanest

thing  that  we  can  do  or  say?  Whatever  it  may  be,  you  can

do or say it. Don’t pretend that anything’s stopping you.



You’ll  never  stop  complaining  until  you  feel  the  same

pleasure  that  the  hedonist  gets  from  self-indulgence—only

from  doing  what’s  proper  to  human  beings  as  far  as

circumstances—inherent  or  fortuitous—allow.  “Enjoyment”

means  doing  as  much  of  what  your  nature  requires  as  you

can. And you can do that anywhere. A privilege not granted

to  a  cylinder—to  determine  its  own  action.  Or  to  water,  or

ﬁre, or any of the other things governed by nature alone, or

by an irrational soul. Too many things obstruct them and get

in  their  way.  But  the  intellect  and  logos  are  able  to  make

their way through anything in their path—by inborn capacity

or  sheer  force  of  will.  Keep  before  your  eyes  the  ease  with

which they do this—the ease with which the logos is carried

through all things, as ﬁre is drawn upward or a stone falls to

earth, as a cylinder rolls down an inclined plane.



That’s  all  you  need.  All  other  obstacles  either  aﬀect  the

lifeless  body,  or  have  no  power  to  shake  or  harm  anything

unless  misperception  takes  over  or  the  logos  surrenders

voluntarily.  Otherwise  those  they  obstruct  would  be

degraded  by  them  immediately.  In  all  other  entities,  when



anything  bad  happens  to  them,  it  aﬀects  them  for  the

worse. Whereas here a person is improved by it (if I can put

it  like  that)—and  we  admire  him  for  reacting  as  a  person

should.



And  keep  in  mind  that  nothing  can  harm  one  of  nature’s

citizens  except  what  harms  the  city  he  belongs  to.  And

nothing  harms  that  city  except  what  harms  its  law.  And

there is no so-called misfortune that can do that. So long as

the law is safe, so is the city—and the citizen.



34.  If  you’ve  immersed  yourself  in  the  principles  of  truth,

the  briefest,  most  random  reminder  is  enough  to  dispel  all

fear and pain:



. . . leaves that the wind



Drives earthward; such are the generations of men.



Your children, leaves.



Leaves  applauding  loyally  and  heaping  praise  upon  you,

or  turning  around  and  calling  down  curses,  sneering  and

mocking from a safe distance.



A glorious reputation handed down by leaves.



All of these “spring up in springtime”—and the wind blows

them  all  away.  And  the  tree  puts  forth  others  to  replace

them.



None  of  us  have  much  time.  And  yet  you  act  as  if  things



were eternal—the way you fear and long for them. . . .



Before  long,  darkness.  And  whoever  buries  you  mourned



in their turn.



35. A healthy pair of eyes should see everything that can be

seen and not say, “No! Too bright!” (which is a symptom of

ophthalmia).



A healthy sense of hearing or smell should be prepared for

any  sound  or  scent;  a  healthy  stomach  should  have  the

same reaction to all foods, as a mill to what it grinds.



So  too  a  healthy  mind  should  be  prepared  for  anything.

The  one  that  keeps  saying,  “Are  my  children  all  right?”  or

“Everyone  must  approve  of  me”  is  like  eyes  that  can  only

stand pale colors, or teeth that can handle only mush.



36. It doesn’t matter how good a life you’ve led. There’ll still

be  people  standing  around  the  bed  who  will  welcome  the

sad event.



Even  with  the  intelligent  and  good.  Won’t  there  be

someone  thinking  “Finally!  To  be  through  with  that  old

schoolteacher.  Even  though  he  never  said  anything,  you

could  always  feel  him  judging  you.”  And  that’s  for  a  good

man. How many traits do you have that would make a lot of

people glad to be rid of you?



Remember  that,  when  the  time  comes.  You’ll  be  less

reluctant to leave if you can tell yourself, “This is the sort of

life  I’m  leaving.  Even  the  people  around  me,  the  ones  I

spent so much time ﬁghting for, praying over, caring about

—even  they want  me gone, in  hopes that it will  make their

own  lives  easier.  How  could  anyone  stand  a  longer  stay

here?”



And yet, don’t leave angry with them. Be true to who you

are: caring, sympathetic, kind. And not as if you were being

torn  away  from  life.  But  the  way  it  is  when  someone  dies

peacefully,  how  the  soul  is  released  from  the  body—that’s



how you should leave them. It was nature that bound you to

them—that tied the knot. And nature that now unties you.



I am released from those around me. Not dragged against



my will, but unresisting.



There  are  things  that  nature  demands.  And  this  is  one  of



them.



37. Learn to ask of all actions, “Why are they doing that?”



Starting with your own.



38. Remember that what pulls the strings is within—hidden

from  us.  Is  speech,  is  life,  is  the  person.  Don’t  conceive  of

the  rest  as  part  of  it—the  skin  that  contains  it,  and  the

accompanying  organs.  Which  are  tools—like  a  carpenter’s

axe,  except  that  they’re  attached  to  us  from  birth,  and  are

no more use  without  what moves  and holds them still  than

the weaver’s shuttle, the writer’s pencil, the driver’s whip.



