Book Eleven+



1. Characteristics of the rational

soul:



Self-perception,  self-examination,  and  the  power  to  make



of itself whatever it wants.



It  reaps  its  own  harvest,  unlike  plants  (and,  in  a  diﬀerent



way, animals), whose yield is gathered in by others.



It  reaches  its  intended  goal,  no  matter  where  the  limit  of

its  life  is  set.  Not  like  dancing  and  theater  and  things  like

that,  where  the  performance  is  incomplete  if  it’s  broken  oﬀ

in  the  middle,  but  at  any  point—no  matter  which  one  you

pick—it has fulﬁlled its mission, done its work completely. So

that it can say, “I have what I came for.”



It  surveys  the  world  and  the  empty  space  around  it,  and

the  way  it’s  put  together.  It  delves  into  the  endlessness  of

time to extend its grasp and comprehension of the periodic

births  and  rebirths  that  the  world  goes  through.  It  knows

that those who come after us will see nothing diﬀerent, that

those  who  came  before  us  saw  no  more  than  we  do,  and

that  anyone  with  forty  years  behind  him  and  eyes  in  his

head has seen both past and future—both alike.



Also characteristic of the rational soul:



Aﬀection  for  its  neighbors.  Truthfulness.  Humility.  Not  to

place anything above itself—which is characteristic of law as



well. No diﬀerence here between the logos of rationality and

that of justice.



2.  To  acquire  indiﬀerence  to  pretty  singing,  to  dancing,  to

the  martial  arts:  Analyze  the  melody  into  the  notes  that

form  it,  and  as  you  hear  each  one,  ask  yourself  whether

you’re  powerless  against  that.  That  should  be  enough  to

deter you.



The  same  with  dancing: 



individual  movements  and



tableaux. And the same with the martial arts.



And with everything—except virtue and what springs from

it.  Look  at  the  individual  parts  and  move  from  analysis  to

indiﬀerence.



Apply this to life as a whole.



3. The resolute soul:



Resolute  in  separation  from  the  body.  And  then  in



dissolution or fragmentation—or continuity.



But the resolution has to be the result of its own decision,

not just in response to outside forces [like the Christians]. It

has  to  be  considered  and  serious,  persuasive  to  other

people. Without dramatics.



4.  Have  I  done  something  for  the  common  good?  Then  I

share in the beneﬁts.



To stay centered on that. Not to give up.



5.  “And  your  profession?”  “Goodness.”  (And  how  is  that  to

be achieved, except by thought—about the world, about the

nature of people?)



6.  First,  tragedies.  To  remind  us  of  what  can  happen,  and

that  it  happens  inevitably—and  if  something  gives  you

pleasure on that stage, it shouldn’t cause you anger on this

one.  You  realize  that  these  are  things  we  all  have  to  go

through,  and  that  even  those  who  cry  aloud  “o  Mount

Cithaeron!” have to endure them. And some excellent lines

as well. These, for example:



If I and my two children cannot move the gods



The gods must have their reasons



Or:



And:



And why should we feel anger at the world?



To harvest life like standing stalks of grain



and a good many others.



Then,  after  tragedy,  Old  Comedy:  instructive  in  its

to  puncture

frankness, 

pretensions.  (Diogenes  used  the  same  tactic  for  similar

ends.)



its  plain  speaking  designed 



Then consider the Middle (and later the New) Comedy and

what it aimed at—gradually degenerating into mere realism

and empty technique. There are undeniably good passages,

even  in  those  writers,  but  what  was  the  point  of  it  all—the

script and staging alike?



7.  It  stares  you  in  the  face.  No  role  is  so  well  suited  to

philosophy as the one you happen to be in right now.



8.  A  branch  cut  away  from  the  branch  beside  it  is

simultaneously  cut  away  from  the  whole  tree.  So  too  a

human  being  separated  from  another  is  cut  loose  from  the

whole community.



The  branch  is  cut  oﬀ  by  someone  else.  But  people  cut

themselves  oﬀ—through  hatred,  through  rejection—and

don’t  realize  that  they’re  cutting  themselves  oﬀ  from  the

whole civic enterprise.



Except  that  we  also  have  a  gift,  given  us  by  Zeus,  who

founded this community of ours. We can reattach ourselves

and become once more components of the whole.



But  if  the  rupture  is  too  often  repeated,  it  makes  the

severed part hard to reconnect, and to restore. You can see

the  diﬀerence  between  the  branch  that’s  been  there  since

the  beginning,  remaining  on  the  tree  and  growing  with  it,

and the one that’s been cut oﬀ and grafted back.



“One trunk, two minds.” As the gardeners put it.



9.  As  you  move  forward  in  the  logos, people  will  stand  in

your  way.  They  can’t  keep  you  from  doing  what’s  healthy;

don’t  let  them  stop  you  from  putting  up  with  them  either.

Take  care  on  both  counts.  Not  just  sound  judgments,  solid

actions—tolerance  as  well,  for  those  who  try  to  obstruct  us

or give us trouble in other ways.



Because  anger,  too,  is  weakness,  as  much  as  breaking

down  and  giving  up  the  struggle.  Both  are  deserters:  the

man who breaks and runs, and the one who lets himself be

alienated from his fellow humans.



10.  The  natural  can  never  be  inferior  to  the  artiﬁcial;  art

imitates  nature,  not  the  reverse.  In  which  case,  that  most

highly developed and comprehensive nature—Nature itself—

cannot fall short of artiﬁce in its craftsmanship.



Now,  all  the  arts  move  from  lower  goals  to  higher  ones.



Won’t Nature do the same?



Hence justice. Which is the source of all the other virtues.

For  how  could  we  do  what  justice  requires  if  we  are

distracted  by  things  that  don’t  matter,  if  we  are  naive,

gullible, inconstant?



11.  It’s  the  pursuit  of  these  things,  and  your  attempts  to

avoid  them,  that  leave  you  in  such  turmoil.  And  yet  they

aren’t seeking you out; you are the one seeking them.



Suspend  judgment  about  them.  And  at  once  they  will  lie



still, and you will be freed from ﬂeeing and pursuing.



12.  The  soul  as  a  sphere  in  equilibrium:  Not  grasping  at

things  beyond  it  or  retreating  inward.  Not  fragmenting

outward, not sinking back on itself, but ablaze with light and

looking at the truth, without and within.



13. Someone despises me.



That’s their problem.



Mine: not to do or say anything despicable.



Someone hates me. Their problem.



Mine:  to  be patient  and cheerful  with  everyone, including

them.  Ready  to  show  them  their  mistake.  Not  spitefully,  or

to  show  oﬀ  my  own  self-control,  but  in  an  honest,  upright

way. Like Phocion (if he wasn’t just pretending). That’s what

we  should  be  like  inside,  and  never  let  the  gods  catch  us

feeling anger or resentment.



As  long  as  you  do  what’s  proper  to  your  nature,  and

accept what the world’s nature has in store—as long as you

work for others’ good, by any and all means—what is there

that can harm you?



14.  They  ﬂatter  one  another  out  of  contempt,  and  their

desire to rule one another makes them bow and scrape.



15.  The  despicable  phoniness  of  people  who  say,  “Listen,

I’m  going to  level  with  you  here.” What  does that  mean? It



shouldn’t  even  need  to  be  said.  It  should  be  obvious—

written  in  block  letters  on  your  forehead.  It  should  be

audible  in  your  voice,  visible  in  your  eyes,  like  a  lover  who

looks  into  your  face  and  takes  in  the  whole  story  at  a

glance.  A  straightforward,  honest  person  should  be  like

someone  who  stinks:  when  you’re  in  the  same  room  with

him, you know it. But false straightforwardness is like a knife

in the back.



False friendship is the worst. Avoid it at all costs. If you’re

honest and straightforward and mean well, it should show in

your eyes. It should be unmistakable.



16. To live a good life:



We  have  the  potential  for  it.  If  we  can  learn  to  be

indiﬀerent  to  what  makes  no  diﬀerence.  This  is  how  we

learn:  by  looking  at  each  thing,  both  the  parts  and  the

whole.  Keeping  in  mind  that  none  of  them  can  dictate  how

we  perceive  it.  They  don’t  impose  themselves  on  us.  They

hover  before  us,  unmoving.  It  is  we  who  generate  the

judgments—inscribing  them  on  ourselves.  And  we  don’t

have to. We could leave the page blank—and if a mark slips

through, erase it instantly.



Remember  how  brief  is  the  attentiveness  required.  And



then our lives will end.



And  why  is  it  so  hard  when  things  go  against  you?  If  it’s

imposed by nature, accept it gladly and stop ﬁghting it. And

if  not,  work  out  what  your  own  nature  requires,  and  aim  at

that, even if it brings you no glory.



None of us is forbidden to pursue our own good.



17.  Source  and  substance  of  each  thing.  What  it  changes

into,  and  what  it’s  like  transformed;  that  nothing  can  harm

it.



18. i. My relationship to them. That we came into the world

for the sake of one another. Or from another point of view, I

came into it to be their guardian—as the ram is of the ﬂock,

and the bull of the herd.



Start  from  this:  if  not  atoms,  then  Nature—directing

everything. In that case, lower things for the sake of higher

ones, and higher ones for one another.



ii.  What  they’re  like  eating,  in  bed,  etc.  How  driven

they  are  by  their  beliefs.  How  proud  they  are  of

what they do.



iii. That if they’re right to do this, then you have no

right to complain. And if they aren’t, then they do it

involuntarily, out of ignorance. Because all souls are

prevented from treating others as they deserve, just

as  they  are  kept  from  truth:  unwillingly.  Which  is

why they resent being called unjust, or arrogant, or

greedy—any  suggestion  that  they  aren’t  good

neighbors.



iv.  That  you’ve  made  enough  mistakes  yourself.

You’re just like them.



Even  if  there  are  some  you’ve  avoided,  you  have

the potential.



Even  if  cowardice  has  kept  you  from  them.  Or  fear

of  what  people  would  say.  Or  some  equally  bad

reason.



v. That you don’t know for sure it is a mistake. A lot

of things are means to some other end. You have to

know  an  awful  lot  before  you  can  judge  other

people’s actions with real understanding.



vi.  When  you  lose  your  temper,  or  even  feel

irritated:  that  human  life  is  very  short.  Before  long

all of us will be laid out side by side.



vii. That it’s not what they do that bothers us: that’s

a  problem  for  their  minds,  not  ours.  It’s  our  own

misperceptions.  Discard  them.  Be  willing  to  give  up

thinking of this as a catastrophe . . . and your anger

is  gone.  How  do  you  do  that?  By  recognizing  that

you’ve  suﬀered  no  disgrace.  Unless  disgrace  is  the

only  thing  that  can  hurt  you,  you’re  doomed  to

commit innumerable oﬀenses—to become a thief, or

heaven only knows what else.



viii.  How  much  more  damage  anger  and  grief  do

than the things that cause them.



ix. That kindness is invincible, provided it’s sincere—

not ironic or an act. What can even the most vicious

person  do  if  you  keep  treating  him  with  kindness

and gently set him straight—if you get the chance—

correcting  him  cheerfully  at  the  exact  moment  that

he’s trying to do you harm. “No, no, my friend. That

isn’t  what  we’re  here  for.  It  isn’t  me  who’s  harmed

by that. It’s you.” And show him, gently and without

pointing ﬁngers, that it’s so. That bees don’t behave

like  this—or  any  other  animals  with  a  sense  of

community.  Don’t  do  it  sardonically  or  meanly,  but

aﬀectionately—with no hatred in your heart. And not

ex cathedra or to impress third parties, but speaking

directly. Even if there are other people around.



Keep  these  nine  points  in  mind,  like  gifts  from  the

nine  Muses,  and  start  becoming  a  human  being.

Now and for the rest of your life.



And  along  with  not  getting  angry  at  others,  try  not

to pander either. Both are forms of selﬁshness; both

of  them  will  do  you  harm.  When  you  start  to  lose

your  temper,  remember:  There’s  nothing  manly



about rage. It’s courtesy and kindness that deﬁne a

human  being—and  a  man.  That’s  who  possesses

strength  and  nerves  and  guts,  not  the  angry

whiners.  To  react  like  that  brings  you  closer  to

impassivity—and so to strength. Pain is the opposite

of  strength,  and  so  is  anger.  Both  are  things  we

suﬀer from, and yield to.



. . . and one more thought, from Apollo:



x.  That  to  expect  bad  people  not  to  injure  others  is

crazy.  It’s  to  ask  the  impossible.  And  to  let  them

behave like that to other people but expect them to

exempt you is arrogant—the act of a tyrant.



19. Four habits of thought to watch for, and erase from your

mind when you catch them. Tell yourself:



• This thought is unnecessary.



• This one is destructive to the people around you.



•  This  wouldn’t  be  what  you  really  think  (to  say  what

you don’t think—the deﬁnition of absurdity).



And  the  fourth  reason  for  self-reproach:  that  the  more

divine  part  of  you  has  been  beaten  and  subdued  by  the

degraded  mortal  part—the  body  and 

its  stupid  self-

indulgence.



20.  Your  spirit  and  the  ﬁre  contained  within  you  are  drawn

by  their  nature  upward.  But  they  comply  with  the  world’s

designs  and  submit  to  being  mingled  here  below.  And  the

elements  of  earth  and  water  in  you  are  drawn  by  their



nature  downward.  But  are  forced  to  rise,  and  take  up  a

position not their own. So even the elements obey the world

—when ordered and compelled—and man their stations until

the signal to abandon them arrives.



So  why  should  your  intellect  be  the  only  dissenter—the

only  one  complaining  about  its  posting?  It’s  not  as  if

anything  is  being  forced  on  it.  Only  what  its  own  nature

requires.  And  yet  it  refuses  to  comply,  and  sets  oﬀ  in  the

opposite  direction.  Because  to  be  drawn  toward  what  is

wrong and self-indulgent, toward anger and fear and pain, is

to revolt against nature. And for the mind to complain about

anything that happens is to desert its post. It was created to

show reverence—respect for the divine—no less than to act

justly.  That  too  is  an  element  of  coexistence  and  a

prerequisite for justice.



21. “If you don’t have a consistent goal in life, you can’t live

it in a consistent way.”



Unhelpful, unless you specify a goal.



There  is  no  common  benchmark  for  all  the  things  that

people  think  are  good—except  for  a  few,  the  ones  that

aﬀect  us  all.  So  the  goal  should  be  a  common  one—a  civic

one. If you direct all your energies toward that, your actions

will be consistent. And so will you.



22.  The  town  mouse  and  the  country  mouse.  Distress  and

agitation of the town mouse.



23.  Socrates  used  to  call  popular  beliefs  “the  monsters

under the bed”—only useful for frightening children with.



24.  At  festivals  the  Spartans  put  their  guests’  seats  in  the

shade, but sat themselves down anywhere.



25. Socrates declining Perdiccas’s invitation “so as to avoid

dying a thousand deaths” (by accepting a favor he couldn’t

pay back).



26. This advice from Epicurean writings: to think continually

of one of the men of old who lived a virtuous life.



27.  The  Pythagoreans  tell  us  to  look  at  the  stars  at

daybreak. To remind ourselves how they complete the tasks

assigned them—always the same tasks, the same way. And

their order, purity, nakedness. Stars wear no concealment.



28. Socrates dressed in a towel, the time Xanthippe took his

cloak and went out. The friends who were embarrassed and

avoided him when they saw him dressed like that, and what

Socrates said to them.



29.  Mastery  of  reading  and  writing  requires  a  master.  Still

more so life.



30.  “.  .  .  For  you/Are  but  a  slave  and  have  no  claim  to

logos.”



31. “But my heart rejoiced.”



32. “And jeer at virtue with their taunts and sneers.”



33.  Stupidity  is  expecting  ﬁgs  in  winter,  or  children  in  old

age.



34. As you kiss your son good night, says Epictetus, whisper

to yourself, “He may be dead in the morning.”



Don’t tempt fate, you say.



By talking about a natural event? Is fate tempted when we



speak of grain being reaped?



35. Grapes.



Unripe . . . ripened . . . then raisins.



Constant transitions.



Not the “not” but the “not yet.”



36. “No thefts of free will reported.”[—Epictetus.]



37. “We need to master the art of acquiescence. We need to

pay  attention  to  our  impulses,  making  sure  they  don’t  go

unmoderated,  that  they  beneﬁt  others,  that  they’re  worthy

of us. We need to steer clear of desire in any form and not

try to avoid what’s beyond our control.”



38. “This is not a debate about just anything,” he said, “but

about sanity itself.”



39. Socrates: What do you want, rational minds or irrational

ones?



—Rational ones.



Healthy or sick?



—Healthy.



Then work to obtain them.



—We already have.



Then why all this squabbling?



