Book Twelve+



1. Everything you’re trying to reach—by taking the long way

round—you could have right now, this moment. If you’d only

stop thwarting your own attempts. If you’d only let go of the

past,  entrust  the  future  to  Providence,  and  guide  the

present toward reverence and justice.



Reverence:  so  you’ll  accept  what  you’re  allotted.  Nature



intended it for you, and you for it.



Justice: so that you’ll speak the truth, frankly and without

evasions,  and  act  as  you  should—and  as  other  people

deserve.



Don’t let anything deter you: other people’s misbehavior,

your  own  misperceptions,  What  People  Will  Say,  or  the

feelings  of  the  body  that  covers  you  (let  the  aﬀected  part

take  care  of  those).  And  if,  when  it’s  time  to  depart,  you

shunt  everything  aside  except  your  mind  and  the  divinity

within . . . if it isn’t ceasing to live that you’re afraid of but

never beginning to live properly . . . then you’ll be worthy of

the world that made you.



No longer an alien in your own land.



No  longer  shocked  by  everyday  events—as  if  they  were



unheard-of aberrations.



No longer at the mercy of this, or that.



2. God sees all our souls freed from their ﬂeshly containers,

stripped  clean  of  their  bark,  cleansed  of  their  grime.  He

grasps  with  his  intelligence  alone  what  was  poured  and

channeled  from  himself  into  them.  If  you  learn  to  do  the

same, you can avoid a great deal of distress. When you see

through  the  ﬂesh  that  covers  you,  will  you  be  unsettled  by

clothing, mansions, celebrity—the painted sets, the costume

cupboard?



3.  Your  three  components:  body,  breath,  mind.  Two  are

yours in trust; to the third alone you have clear title.



If  you  can  cut  yourself—your  mind—free  of  what  other

people  do  and  say,  of  what  you’ve  said  or  done,  of  the

things that you’re afraid will happen, the impositions of the

body that contains you and the breath within, and what the

whirling  chaos  sweeps  in  from  outside,  so  that  the  mind  is

freed  from  fate,  brought  to  clarity,  and  lives  life  on  its  own

recognizance—doing  what’s  right,  accepting  what  happens,

and speaking the truth—



If  you  can  cut  free  of  impressions  that  cling  to  the  mind,

free  of  the  future  and  the  past—can  make  yourself,  as

Empedocles says, “a sphere rejoicing in its perfect stillness,”

and  concentrate  on  living  what  can  be  lived  (which  means

the present) . . . then you can spend the time you have left

in tranquillity. And in kindness. And at peace with the spirit

within you.



4. It never ceases to amaze me: we all love ourselves more

than  other  people,  but  care  more  about  their  opinion  than

our  own.  If  a  god  appeared  to  us—or  a  wise  human  being,

even—and  prohibited  us  from  concealing  our  thoughts  or

imagining anything without immediately shouting it out, we

wouldn’t make it through a single day. That’s how much we

value other people’s opinions—instead of our own.



5.  How  is  it  that  the  gods  arranged  everything  with  such

skill, such care for our well-being, and somehow overlooked

one thing: that certain people—in fact, the best of them, the

gods’  own  partners,  the  ones  whose  piety  and  good  works

brought them closest to the divine—that these people, when

they die, should cease to exist forever? Utterly vanished.



Well,  assuming  that’s  really  true,  you  can  be  sure  they

would  have  arranged  things  diﬀerently,  if  that  had  been

appropriate. If it were the right thing to do, they could have

done it, and if it were natural, nature would have demanded

it.  So  from  the  fact  that  they  didn’t—if  that’s  the  case—we

can conclude that it was inappropriate.



Surely you can see yourself that to ask the question is to

challenge the gods’ fairness. And why would you be bringing

in fairness unless the gods are, in fact, fair—and absolutely

so?



And if  they  are,  how  could  they  have  carelessly

overlooked  something  so  unfair—so  illogical—in  setting  up

the world?



6. Practice even what seems impossible.



The  left  hand  is  useless  at  almost  everything,  for  lack  of

practice.  But  it  guides  the  reins  better  than  the  right.  From

practice.



7. The condition of soul and body when death comes for us.



Shortness of life.



Vastness of time before and after.



Fragility of matter.



8.  To  see  the  causes  of  things  stripped  bare.  The  aim  of

actions.



Pain. Pleasure. Death. Fame.



Who is responsible for our own restlessness.



That no one obstructs us.



That it’s all in how you perceive it.



9. The student as boxer, not fencer.



The fencer’s weapon is picked up and put down again.



The  boxer’s  is  part  of  him.  All  he  has  to  do  is  clench  his



ﬁst.



10.  To  see  things  as  they  are.  Substance,  cause  and

purpose.



11.  The  freedom  to  do  only  what  God  wants,  and  accept

whatever God sends us.



11a. What it’s made of.



12.  The  gods  are  not  to  blame.  They  do  nothing  wrong,  on

purpose or by accident. Nor men either; they don’t do it on

purpose. No one is to blame.



13. The foolishness of people who are surprised by anything

that happens. Like travelers amazed at foreign customs.



14.  Fatal  necessity,  and  inescapable  order.  Or  benevolent

Providence. Or confusion—random and undirected.



If it’s an inescapable necessity, why resist it?



If  it’s  Providence,  and  admits  of  being  worshipped,  then



try to be worthy of God’s aid.



If it’s confusion and anarchy, then be grateful that on this

raging  sea  you  have  a  mind  to  guide  you.  And  if  the  storm

should  carry  you  away,  let  it  carry  oﬀ  ﬂesh,  breath  and  all

the rest, but not the mind. Which can’t be swept away.



15.  The  lamp  shines  until  it  is  put  out,  without  losing  its

gleam,  and  yet  in  you  it  all  gutters  out  so  early—truth,

justice, self-control?



16. When someone seems to have injured you:



But how can I be sure?



And in any case, keep in mind:



•  that  he’s  already  been  tried  and  convicted—by

himself. (Like scratching your own eyes out.)



• that to expect a bad person not to harm others is like

expecting  ﬁg  trees  not  to  secrete  juice,  babies  not  to

cry, horses not to neigh—the inevitable not to happen.



What else could they do—with that sort of character?



If you’re still angry, then get to work on that.



17.  If  it’s  not  right,  don’t  do  it.  If  it’s  not  true,  don’t  say  it.

Let your intention be < . . . >



18. At all times, look at the thing itself—the thing behind the

appearance—and unpack it by analysis:



• cause



• substance



• purpose



• and the length of time it exists.



19.  It’s  time  you  realized  that  you  have  something  in  you

more  powerful  and  miraculous  than  the  things  that  aﬀect

you and make you dance like a puppet.



What’s  in  my  thoughts  at  this  moment?  Fear?  Jealousy?



Desire? Feelings like that?



20. To undertake nothing:



i. at random or without a purpose;



ii. for any reason but the common good.



21. That before long you’ll be no one, and nowhere. Like all

the things you see now. All the people now living.



Everything’s  destiny  is  to  change,  to  be  transformed,  to



perish. So that new things can be born.



22. It’s all in how you perceive it. You’re in control. You can

dispense with misperception at will, like rounding the point.

Serenity, total calm, safe anchorage.



23. A given action that stops when it’s supposed to is none

the worse for stopping. Nor the person engaged in it either.

So too with the succession of actions we call “life.” If it ends

when it’s supposed to, it’s none the worse for that. And the

person  who  comes  to  the  end  of  the  line  has  no  cause  for

complaint. The time and stopping point are set by nature—

our  own  nature,  in  some  cases  (death  from  old  age);  or

nature  as  a  whole,  whose  parts,  shifting  and  changing,

constantly renew the world, and keep it on schedule.



Nothing  that  beneﬁts  all  things  can  be  ugly  or  out  of

place.  The  end  of  life  is  not  an  evil—it  doesn’t  disgrace  us.

(Why  should  we  be  ashamed  of  an  involuntary  act  that



injures no one?). It’s a good thing—scheduled by the world,

promoting it, promoted by it.



This is how we become godlike—following God’s path, and



reason’s goals.



24. Three things, essential at all times:



i(a).  your  own  actions:  that  they’re  not  arbitrary  or

diﬀerent from what abstract justice would do.



i(b). external events: that they happen randomly or

by  design.  You  can’t  complain  about  chance.  You

can’t argue with Providence.



ii.  what  all  things  are  like,  from  the  planting  of  the

its

seed  to  the  quickening  of 

quickening  to  its  relinquishment.  Where  the  parts

came from and where they return to.



life,  and  from 



iii. that if you were suddenly lifted up and could see

life  and  its  variety  from  a  vast  height,  and  at  the

same time all the things around you, in the sky and

beyond  it,  you’d  see  how  pointless  it  is.  And  no

matter how often you saw it, it would be the same:

the same life forms, the same life span.



Arrogance . . . about this?



25.  Throw  out  your  misperceptions  and  you’ll  be  ﬁne.  (And

who’s stopping you from throwing them out?)



26. To be angry at something means you’ve forgotten:



That everything that happens is natural.



That the responsibility is theirs, not yours.



And further . . .



That  whatever  happens  has  always  happened,  and

always  will,  and  is  happening  at  this  very  moment,

everywhere. Just like this.



What links one human being to all humans: not blood, or

birth, but mind.



And . . .



That an individual’s mind is God and of God.



That  nothing  belongs  to  anyone.  Children,  body,  life

itself—all of them come from that same source.



That it’s all how you choose to see things.



That the present is all we have to live in. Or to lose.



the  most 



27.  Constantly  run  down  the  list  of  those  who  felt  intense

the  most

anger  at  something: 

unfortunate,  the  most  hated,  the  most  whatever.  And  ask:

Where is all that now? Smoke, dust, legend . . . or not even

a legend. Think of all the examples: Fabius Catullinus in the

country,  Lusius  Lupus  in  the  orchard,  Stertinius  at  Baiae,

Tiberius on Capri, Velius Rufus . . . obsession and arrogance.



famous, 



And  how  trivial  the  things  we  want  so  passionately  are.

And how much more philosophical it would be to take what

we’re given and show uprightness, self-control, obedience to

God,  without  making  a  production  of  it.  There’s  nothing

more  insuﬀerable  than  people  who  boast  about  their  own

humility.



28. People ask, “Have you ever seen the gods you worship?

How can you be sure they exist?”



Answers:



i. Just look around you.



ii. I’ve never seen my soul either. And yet I revere it.



That’s  how  I  know  the  gods  exist  and  why  I  revere  them—

from having felt their power, over and over.



29. Salvation: to see each thing for what it is—its nature and

its purpose.



To  do  only  what  is  right,  say  only  what  is  true,  without



holding back.



What  else  could  it  be  but  to  live  life  fully—to  pay  out

goodness like the rings of a chain, without the slightest gap.



30. Singular, not plural:



Sunlight. Though broken up by walls and mountains and a



thousand other things.



Substance.  Though  split  into  a  thousand  forms,  variously



shaped.



Life.  Though  distributed  among  a  thousand  diﬀerent



natures with their individual limitations.



Intelligence. Even if it seems to be divided.



The  other 



components—breath,  matter—lack  any

awareness  or  connection  to  one  another  (yet  unity  and  its

gravitational pull embrace them too).



But  intelligence  is  uniquely  drawn  toward  what  is  akin  to



it, and joins with it inseparably, in shared awareness.



31. What is it you want? To keep on breathing? What about

feeling?  desiring?  growing?  ceasing  to  grow?  using  your

voice? thinking? Which of them seems worth having?



But if you can do without them all, then continue to follow

the logos, and God. To the end. To prize those other things—

to  grieve  because  death  deprives  us  of  them—is  an

obstacle.



32.  The  fraction  of  inﬁnity,  of  that  vast  abyss  of  time,

allotted to each of us. Absorbed in an instant into eternity.



The fraction of all substance, and all spirit.



The fraction of the whole earth you crawl about on.



Keep  all  that  in  mind,  and  don’t  treat  anything  as

important  except  doing  what  your  nature  demands,  and

accepting what Nature sends you.



33. How the mind conducts itself. It all depends on that. All

the  rest  is  within  its  power,  or  beyond  its  control—corpses

and smoke.



34. An incentive to treat death as unimportant: even people

whose  only  morality  is  pain  and  pleasure  can  manage  that

much.



35. If you make ripeness alone your good . . .



If a few actions more or less, governed by the right logos,



are merely a few more or less . . .



If it makes no diﬀerence whether you look at the world for



this long or that long . . .



. . . then death shouldn’t scare you.



36.  You’ve  lived  as  a  citizen  in  a  great  city.  Five  years  or  a

hundred—what’s 

laws  make  no

the  diﬀerence?  The 

distinction.



And to be sent away from it, not by a tyrant or a dishonest

judge, but by Nature, who ﬁrst invited you in—why is that so

terrible?



Like the impresario ringing down the curtain on an actor:



“But I’ve only gotten through three acts . . . !”



Yes. This will be a drama in three acts, the length ﬁxed by

the power that directed your creation, and now directs your

dissolution. Neither was yours to determine.



So  make  your  exit  with  grace—the  same  grace  shown  to



you.
